1. Neuroscience. 1996 Mar;71(2):397-410.

Modeling N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced bursting in dopamine neurons.

Li YX(1), Bertram R, Rinzel J.

Author information: 
(1)Mathematical Research Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Burst firing of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta can be
induced in vitro by the glutamate agonist N-methyl-D-aspartate. It has been
suggested that the interburst hyperpolarization is due to Na+ extrusion by a
ouabain-sensitive pump [Johnson et al. (1992) Science 258, 665-667]. We formulate
and explore a theoretical model, with a minimal number of currents, for this
novel mechanism of burst generation. This minimal model is further developed into
a more elaborate model based on observations of additional currents and
hypotheses about their spatial distribution in dopaminergic neurons [Hounsgaard
(1992) Neuroscience 50, 513-518; Llinás et al. (1984) Brain Res. 294, 127-132].
Using the minimal model, we confirm that interaction between the regenerative,
inward N-methyl-D-aspartate-mediated current and the outward Na(+)-pump current
is sufficient to generate the slow oscillation (approximately 0.5 Hz) underlying 
the burst. The negative-slope region of the N-methyl-D-aspartate channel's
current-voltage relation is indispensable for this slow rhythm generation. The
time-scale of Na(+)-handling determines the burst's slow frequency. Moreover, we 
show that, given the constraints of sodium handling, such bursting is best
explained mechanistically by using at least two spatial, cable-like compartments:
a soma where action potentials are produced and a dendritic compartment where the
slow rhythm is generated. Our result is consistent with recent experimental
evidence that burst generation originates in distal dendrites [Seutin et al.
(1994) Neuroscience 58, 201-206]. Responses of the model to a number of
electrophysiological and pharmacological stimuli are consistent with known
responses observed under similar conditions. These include the persistence of the
slow rhythm when the tetrodotoxin-sensitive Na+ channel is blocked and when the
soma is voltage-clamped at -60 mV. Using our more elaborate model, we account for
details of the observed frequency adaptation in N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced
bursting, the origin of multiple spiking and bursting mechanisms, and the
interaction between two different bursting mechanisms. Besides reproducing
several well established firing patterns, this model also suggests that new
firing modes, not yet recorded, might also occur in dopaminergic neurons. This
model provides mechanistic insights and explanations into the origin of a variety
of experimentally observed membrane potential firing patterns in dopaminergic
neurons, including N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced bursting and its dendritic
origin. Such a model, capable of reproducing a number of realistic behaviors of
dopaminergic neurons, could be useful in further studies of the basal
ganglia-thalamocortical motor circuit. It may also shed light on bursting that
involves N-methyl-D-aspartate channel activity in other neuron types.

PMID: 9053795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]