1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 11;415(1):141-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.034. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

A mechanism underlying compound-induced voltage shift in the current activation
of hERG by antiarrhythmic agents.

Furutani K(1), Yamakawa Y, Inanobe A, Iwata M, Ohno Y, Kurachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan. furutani@pharma2.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Nifekalant and azimilide, Class III antiarrhythmic agents, block the human
ether-à-go-go-related gene K(+) (hERG) channel. However, when a depolarizing
membrane potential is applied, they also increase the current at low potentials
by shifting its activation curve towards hyperpolarizing voltages. This
phenomenon is called 'facilitation'. In this study, we tried to address the
mechanism underlying the facilitation by analyzing the effects of various
compounds on hERG expressed in Xenopus oocytes. Like nifekalant, amiodarone,
quinidine and carvedilol, but not by dofetilide, caused the current facilitation 
of hERG, suggesting that the facilitation is a common effect to a subset of hERG 
blockers. As the concentration of each compound was increased, the total hERG
current was suppressed progressively, while the current at low potentials was
augmented. Activation curves of the remaining hERG current in the facilitation
condition could be described as the sum of two Boltzmann functions reflecting two
populations of hERG currents having different activation curves. The voltage
shift in the activation curve from control was constant for each compound even at
different concentrations; -31 mV in amiodarone, -27 mV in nifekalant, -17 mV in
quinidine and -12 mV in carvedilol. Therefore, the facilitation is based on the
appearance of hERG whose voltage-dependence for the activation is shifted towards
hyperpolarizing voltages.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22020101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]