1. J Neurophysiol. 1991 Aug;66(2):635-50.

A model of a CA3 hippocampal pyramidal neuron incorporating voltage-clamp data on
intrinsic conductances.

Traub RD(1), Wong RK, Miles R, Michelson H.

Author information: 
(1)IBM Research Division, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights
10598.

1. We have developed a 19-compartment cable model of a guinea pig CA3 pyramidal
neuron. Each compartment is allowed to contain six active ionic conductances:
gNa, gCa, gK(DR) (where DR stands for delayed rectifier), gK(A), gK(AHP), and
gK(C). THe conductance gCa is of the high-voltage activated type. The model
kinetics for the first five of these conductances incorporate voltage-clamp data 
obtained from isolated hippocampal pyramidal neurons. The kinetics of gK(C) are
based on data from bullfrog sympathetic neurons. The time constant for decay of
submembrane calcium derives from optical imaging of Ca signals in Purkinje cell
dendrites. 2. To construct the model from available voltage-clamp data, we first 
reproduced current-clamp records from a model isolated neuron (soma plus proximal
dendrites). We next assumed that ionic channel kinetics in the dendrites were the
same as in the soma. In accord with dendritic recordings and calcium-imaging
data, we also assumed that significant gCa occurs in dendrites. We then attached 
sections of basilar and apical dendritic cable. By trial and error, we found a
distribution (not necessarily unique) of ionic conductance densities that was
consistent with current-clamp records from the soma and dendrites of whole
neurons and from isolated apical dendrites. 3. The resulting model reproduces the
Ca(2+)-dependent spike depolarizing afterpotential (DAP) recorded after a
stimulus subthreshold for burst elicitation. 4. The model also reproduces the
behavior of CA3 pyramidal neurons injected with increasing somatic depolarizing
currents: low-frequency (0.3-1.0 Hz) rhythmic bursting for small currents, with
burst frequency increasing with current magnitude; then more irregular bursts
followed by afterhyperpolarizations (AHPs) interspersed with brief bursts without
AHPs; and finally, rhythmic action potentials without bursts. 5. The model
predicts the existence of still another firing pattern during tonic depolarizing 
dendritic stimulation: brief bursts at less than 1 to approximately 12 Hz, a
pattern not observed during somatic stimulation. These bursts correspond to
rhythmic dendritic calcium spikes. 6. The model CA3 pyramidal neuron can be made 
to resemble functionally a CA1 pyramidal neuron by increasing gK(DR) and
decreasing dendritic gCa and gK(C). Specifically, after these alterations, tonic 
depolarization of the soma leads to adapting repetitive firing, whereas
stimulation of the distal dendrites leads to bursting. 7. A critical set of
parameters concerns the regulation of the pool of intracellular [Ca2+] that
interacts with membrane channels (gK(C) and gK(AHP)), particularly in the
dendrites.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1663538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]