1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 3;9(10):e109271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109271.
eCollection 2014.

Ischemia-related subcellular redistribution of sodium channels enhances the
proarrhythmic effect of class I antiarrhythmic drugs: a simulation study.

Tsumoto K(1), Ashihara T(2), Haraguchi R(3), Nakazawa K(4), Kurachi Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate school of Medicine, Osaka University,
Suita, Japan. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Shiga University of
Medical Science, Otsu, Japan. (3)Department of Medical Informatics, National
Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Biomedical
Science and Information Management, Research Institute, National Cerebral and
Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate
school of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan; Center for Advanced Medical
Engineering and Informatics, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cardiomyocytes located at the ischemic border zone of infarcted
ventricle are accompanied by redistribution of gap junctions, which mediate
electrical transmission between cardiomyocytes. This ischemic border zone
provides an arrhythmogenic substrate. It was also shown that sodium (Na+)
channels are redistributed within myocytes located in the ischemic border zone.
However, the roles of the subcellular redistribution of Na+ channels in the
arrhythmogenicity under ischemia remain unclear.
METHODS: Computer simulations of excitation conduction were performed in a
myofiber model incorporating both subcellular Na+ channel redistribution and the 
electric field mechanism, taking into account the intercellular cleft potentials.
RESULTS: We found in the myofiber model that the subcellular redistribution of
the Na+ channels under myocardial ischemia, decreasing in Na+ channel expression 
of the lateral cell membrane of each myocyte, decreased the tissue excitability, 
resulting in conduction slowing even without any ischemia-related
electrophysiological change. The conventional model (i.e., without the electric
field mechanism) did not reproduce the conduction slowing caused by the
subcellular Na+ channel redistribution. Furthermore, Na+ channel blockade with
the coexistence of a non-ischemic zone with an ischemic border zone expanded the 
vulnerable period for reentrant tachyarrhythmias compared to the model without
the ischemic border zone. Na+ channel blockade tended to cause unidirectional
conduction block at sites near the ischemic border zone. Thus, such a
unidirectional conduction block induced by a premature stimulus at sites near the
ischemic border zone is associated with the initiation of reentrant
tachyarrhythmias.
CONCLUSIONS: Proarrhythmia of Na+ channel blockade in patients with old
myocardial infarction might be partly attributable to the ischemia-related
subcellular Na+ channel redistribution.

PMCID: PMC4184874
PMID: 25279776  [PubMed - in process]