1. Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Jan;39(1):24-34. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12388. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Cell-type-dependent action potentials and voltage-gated currents in mouse
fungiform taste buds.

Kimura K(1), Ohtubo Y, Tateno K, Takeuchi K, Kumazawa T, Yoshii K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate school of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of
Technology, Hibikino 2-4, Kitakyushu-shi, 808-0196, Japan.

Taste receptor cells fire action potentials in response to taste substances to
trigger non-exocytotic neurotransmitter release in type II cells and exocytotic
release in type III cells. We investigated possible differences between these
action potentials fired by mouse taste receptor cells using in situ whole-cell
recordings, and subsequently we identified their cell types immunologically with 
cell-type markers, an IP3 receptor (IP3 R3) for type II cells and a SNARE protein
(SNAP-25) for type III cells. Cells not immunoreactive to these antibodies were
examined as non-IRCs. Here, we show that type II cells and type III cells fire
action potentials using different ionic mechanisms, and that non-IRCs also fire
action potentials with either of the ionic mechanisms. The width of action
potentials was significantly narrower and their afterhyperpolarization was deeper
in type III cells than in type II cells. Na(+) current density was similar in
type II cells and type III cells, but it was significantly smaller in non-IRCs
than in the others. Although outwardly rectifying current density was similar
between type II cells and type III cells, tetraethylammonium (TEA) preferentially
suppressed the density in type III cells and the majority of non-IRCs. Our
mathematical model revealed that the shape of action potentials depended on the
ratio of TEA-sensitive current density and TEA-insensitive current one. The
action potentials of type II cells and type III cells under physiological
conditions are discussed.

© 2013 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24152110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]