1. Curr Biol. 2003 Aug 19;13(16):1398-408.

Autoinhibition with transcriptional delay: a simple mechanism for the zebrafish
somitogenesis oscillator.

Lewis J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vertebrate Development Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research
Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.
julian.lewis@cancer.org.uk

BACKGROUND: The pattern of somites is traced out by a mechanism involving
oscillating gene expression at the tail end of the embryo. In zebrafish, two
linked oscillating genes, her1 and her7, coding for inhibitory gene regulatory
proteins, are especially implicated in genesis of the oscillations, while Notch
signaling appears necessary for synchronization of adjacent cells.
RESULTS: I show by mathematical simulation that direct autorepression of her1 and
her7 by their own protein products provides a mechanism for the intracellular
oscillator. This mechanism operates robustly even when one allows for the fact
that gene regulation is an essentially noisy (stochastic) process. The predicted 
period is close to the observed period (30 min) and is dictated primarily by the 
transcriptional delay, the time taken to make an mRNA molecule. Through its
coupling to her1/her7 expression, Notch signaling can keep the rapid oscillations
in adjacent cells synchronized. When the coupling parameters are varied, however,
the model system can switch to oscillations of a much longer period, resembling
that of the mouse or chick somitogenesis oscillator and governed by the delays in
the Notch pathway. Such Notch-mediated synchronous oscillations are predicted
even in the absence of direct her1/her7 autoregulation, through operation of the 
standard Notch signaling pathway that is usually assumed simply to give lateral
inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: Direct autorepression of a gene by its own product can generate
oscillations, with a period determined by the transcriptional and translational
delays. Simple as they are, such systems show surprising behaviors. To understand
them, unaided intuition is not enough: we need mathematics.

PMID: 12932323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]