1. J Neurophysiol. 1997 Dec;78(6):3371-85.

Compartmental model of vertebrate motoneurons for Ca2+-dependent spiking and
plateau potentials under pharmacological treatment.

Booth V(1), Rinzel J, Kiehn O.

Author information: 
(1)Mathematical Research Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health 9190, Bethesda, Maryland 20814,
USA.

In contrast to the limited response properties observed under normal experimental
conditions, spinal motoneurons generate complex firing patterns, such as
Ca2+-dependent regenerative spiking and plateaus, in the presence of certain
neurotransmitters and ion-channel blockers. We have developed a quantitative
motoneuron model, based on turtle motoneuron data, toinvestigate the roles of
specific ionic currents and the effects of their soma and dendritic distribution 
in generating these complex firing patterns. In addition, the model is used to
explore the effects of multiple ion channel blockers and neurotransmitters that
are known to modulate motoneuron firing patterns. To represent the distribution
of ionic currents across the soma and dendrites, the model contains two
compartments. The soma compartment, representing the soma and proximal dendrites,
contains Hodgkin-Huxley-like sodium (INa) and delayed rectifier K+ (IK-dr)
currents, an N-like Ca2+ current (ICa-N), and a calcium-dependent K+ current
[IK(Ca)]. The dendritic compartment, representing the lumped distal dendrites,
contains, in addition to ICa-N and IK(Ca) as in the soma, a persistent L-like
calcium current (ICa-L). We determined kinetic parameters for INa, IK-dr, ICa-N, 
and IK(Ca) in order to reproduce normal action-potential firing observed in
turtle spinal motoneurons, including fast and slow afterhyperpolarizations (AHPs)
and a linear steady-state frequency-current relation. With this parameter set as 
default, a sequence of pharmacological manipulations were systematically
simulated. A small reduction of IK-dr [mimicking the experimental effect of
tetraethylammonium (TEA) in low concentration] enhanced the slow AHP and caused
calcium spiking (mediated by ICa-N) when INa was blocked. Firing patterns
observed experimentally in high TEA [and tetrodotoxin (TTX)], namely calcium
spikes riding on a calcium plateau, were reproduced only when both IK-dr and
IK(Ca) were reduced. Dendritic plateau potentials, mediated by ICa-L, were
reliably unmasked when IK(Ca) was reduced, mimicking the experimental effect of
the bee venom apamin. The effect of 5-HT, which experimentally induces the
ability to generate calcium-dependent plateau potentials but not calcium spiking,
was reproduced in the model by reducing IK(Ca) alone. The plateau threshold
current level, however, was reduced substantially if a simultaneous increase in
ICa-L was simulated, suggesting that serotonin (5-HT) induces plateau potentials 
by regulating more than one conductance. The onset of the plateau potential
showed significant delays in response to near-threshold, depolarizing current
steps. In addition, the delay times were sensitive to the current step amplitude.
The delay and its sensitivity were explained by examining the model's behavior
near the threshold for plateau onset. This modeling study thus accurately
accounts for the basic firing behavior of vertebrate motoneurons as well as a
range of complex firing patterns invoked by ion-channel blockers and 5-HT. In
addition, our computational results support the hypothesis that the
electroresponsiveness of motoneurons depends on a nonuniform distribution of
ionic conductances, and they predict modulatory effects of 5-HT and properties of
plateau activation that have yet to be tested experimentally.

PMID: 9405551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]