1. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2008 Sep;98(1):52-60. doi:
10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2008.05.003. Epub 2008 May 29.

In silico risk assessment for drug-induction of cardiac arrhythmia.

Suzuki S(1), Murakami S, Tsujimae K, Findlay I, Kurachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka, Japan.

The main components of repolarization reserve for the ventricular action
potential (AP) are the rapid (I(Kr)) and slow (I(Ks)) delayed outward K(+)
currents. While many drugs block I(Kr) and cause life-threatening arrhythmias
including torsades de pointes, the frequency of arrhythmias varies between
different I(Kr)-blockers. Different types of block of I(Kr) cause distinct
phenotypes of prolongation of action potential duration (APD), increase in
transmural dispersion of repolarization (TDR) and, accordingly, occurrence of
torsades de pointes. Therefore the assessment of a drug's proarrhythmic risk
requires a method that provides quantitative and comprehensive comparison of the 
effects of different forms of I(Kr)-blockade upon APDs and TDR. However, most
currently available methods are not adapted to such an extensive comparison.
Here, we introduce I(Kr)-I(Ks) two-dimensional maps of APD and TDR as a novel
risk-assessment method. Taking the kinetics of I(Kr)-blockade into account, APDs 
can be calculated upon a ventricular AP model which systematically alters the
magnitudes of I(Kr) and I(Ks). The calculated APDs are then plotted on a map
where the x axis represents the conductance of I(Kr) while the y axis represents 
that of I(Ks). TDR is simulated with models corresponding to APs in epicardial,
midcardial and endocardial myocardium. These two-dimensional maps of APD and TDR 
successfully account for differences in the risk resulting from three distinct
types of I(Kr)-blockade which correspond to the effects of dofetilide, quinidine 
and vesnarinone. This method may be of use to assess the arrhythmogenic risk of
various I(Kr)-blockers.

PMID: 18635251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]