1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004 Apr;286(4):H1573-89. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

A model for human ventricular tissue.

ten Tusscher KH(1), Noble D, Noble PJ, Panfilov AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theoretical Biology, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The
Netherlands. khwjtuss@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2005 Jan;288(1):H453; author reply H453-4.

The experimental and clinical possibilities for studying cardiac arrhythmias in
human ventricular myocardium are very limited. Therefore, the use of alternative 
methods such as computer simulations is of great importance. In this article we
introduce a mathematical model of the action potential of human ventricular cells
that, while including a high level of electrophysiological detail, is
computationally cost-effective enough to be applied in large-scale spatial
simulations for the study of reentrant arrhythmias. The model is based on recent 
experimental data on most of the major ionic currents: the fast sodium, L-type
calcium, transient outward, rapid and slow delayed rectifier, and inward
rectifier currents. The model includes a basic calcium dynamics, allowing for the
realistic modeling of calcium transients, calcium current inactivation, and the
contraction staircase. We are able to reproduce human epicardial, endocardial,
and M cell action potentials and show that differences can be explained by
differences in the transient outward and slow delayed rectifier currents. Our
model reproduces the experimentally observed data on action potential duration
restitution, which is an important characteristic for reentrant arrhythmias. The 
conduction velocity restitution of our model is broader than in other models and 
agrees better with available data. Finally, we model the dynamics of spiral wave 
rotation in a two-dimensional sheet of human ventricular tissue and show that the
spiral wave follows a complex meandering pattern and has a period of 265 ms. We
conclude that the proposed model reproduces a variety of electrophysiological
behaviors and provides a basis for studies of reentrant arrhythmias in human
ventricular tissue.

PMID: 14656705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]