1. J Neurophysiol. 1999 Aug;82(2):804-17.

Electrophysiological properties of inferior olive neurons: A compartmental model.

Schweighofer N(1), Doya K, Kawato M.

Author information: 
(1)ERATO, Kawato Dynamic Brain Project, Japan Science and Technology Corporation,
Kyoto 619-0288 Japan.

As a step in exploring the functions of the inferior olive, we constructed a
biophysical model of the olivary neurons to examine their unique
electrophysiological properties. The model consists of two compartments to
represent the known distribution of ionic currents across the cell membrane, as
well as the dendritic location of the gap junctions and synaptic inputs. The
somatic compartment includes a low-threshold calcium current (I(Ca_l)), an
anomalous inward rectifier current (I(h)), a sodium current (I(Na)), and a
delayed rectifier potassium current (I(K_dr)). The dendritic compartment contains
a high-threshold calcium current (I(Ca_h)), a calcium-dependent potassium current
(I(K_Ca)), and a current flowing into other cells through electrical coupling
(I(c)). First, kinetic parameters for these currents were set according to
previously reported experimental data. Next, the remaining free parameters were
determined to account for both static and spiking properties of single olivary
neurons in vitro. We then performed a series of simulated pharmacological
experiments using bifurcation analysis and extensive two-parameter searches.
Consistent with previous studies, we quantitatively demonstrated the major role
of I(Ca_l) in spiking excitability. In addition, I(h) had an important modulatory
role in the spike generation and period of oscillations, as previously suggested 
by Bal and McCormick. Finally, we investigated the role of electrical coupling in
two coupled spiking cells. Depending on the coupling strength, the
hyperpolarization level, and the I(Ca_l) and I(h) modulation, the coupled cells
had four different synchronization modes: the cells could be in-phase,
phase-shifted, or anti-phase or could exhibit a complex desynchronized spiking
mode. Hence these simulation results support the counterintuitive hypothesis that
electrical coupling can desynchronize coupled inferior olive cells.

PMID: 10444678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]