J. Phyaiol. (1977), 268, pp. 177-210
With 14 text-figurem
Printed in Great Britain

177

RECONSTRUCTION OF THE ACTION POTENTIAL OF

VENTRICULAR MYOCARDIAL FIBRES

BY G. W. BEELER* AND H. REUTERt

From the *Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55901, U.S.A., and
the tDepartment of Pharmacology, University of Bern,

3010 Bern, Switzerland

(Received 14 September 1976)

SUMMARY

1. A mathematical model of membrane action potentials of mammalian
ventricular myocardial fibres is described. The reconstruction model is
based as closely as possible on ionic currents which have been measured
by the voltage-clamp method.

2. Four individual components of ionic current were formulated mathe-
matically in terms of Hodgkin-Huxley type equations. The model in-
corporates two voltage- and time-dependent inward currents, the excita-
tory inward sodium current, illa, and a secondary or slow inward current,
is, primarily carried by calcium ions. A time-independent outward
potassium current, iK1, exhibiting inward-going rectification, and a volt-
age- and time-dependent outward current, i.1, primarily carried by potas-
sium ions, are further elements of the model.
3. The iNa is primarily responsible for the rapid upstroke of the action
potential, while the other current components determine the configuration
of the plateau of the action potential and the re-polarization phase. The
relative importance of inactivation of i8 and of activation of iL for termi-
nation of the plateau is evaluated by the model.
4. Experimental phenomena like slow recovery of the sodium system
from inactivation, frequency dependence of the action potential duration,
all-or-nothing re-polarization, membrane oscillations are adequately de-
scribed by the model.

5. Possible inadequacies and shortcomings of the model are discussed.

INTRODUCTION

The application of voltage-clamp techniques to the study of the mem-
brane ionic currents in heart muscle, has shown that the quantitative
analysis of the various ionic current components underlying cardiac

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

178
action potential is much more complex than in nerve (for review see
Trautwein, 1973; McAllister, Noble & Tsien, 1975). While there is a great
deal of agreement on the main experimental results, there remain many
areas of uncertainty relative to the kinetics of the dynamic currents. A
complete kinetic analysis of all dynamic ionic currents in cardiac muscle
has not been possible because of the morphological complexity of the
preparations and technical limitations of the voltage-clamp methods.
Nevertheless, several quantitative studies which provide a better under-
standing of membrane ionic currents in cardiac muscle have emerged from
the application of the voltage-clamp.

This paper is a report of a numerical simulation of the ventricular
myocardial action potential which seeks to incorporate the majority of the
experimental evidence. In a sense, it forms a companion presentation to
the recent publication of McAllister et al. (1975) on a numerical reconstruc-
tion of the cardiac Purkinje fibre action potential. There are sufficiently
many and important differences between these two types of cardiac
tissue, both functionally and experimentally, that a more or less com-
plete picture of membrane ionic currents in the myocardium must include
both simulations.

The primary emphasis in this paper will be on the role of the slow
inward current (is) mainly carried by calcium ions which plays a dominant
part in the creation of the myocardial action potential plateau, and which
forms an intimate link between electrical events at the membrane and the
contractile responses of the cell (cf. reviews Bassingthwaighte & Reuter,
1972; Reuter, 1973, 1974; Noble, 1975).

The model presented here relies on published data from various labora-
tories. To the degree that the model has permitted the definition of addi-
tional experiments that might elucidate a given characteristic of the
membrane ionic currents, we have attempted to perform some of those
experiments, and a limited amount of experimental data is incorporated
in this paper for corroborative evidence. The simulation is confined to
uniform 'membrane action potentials', and therefore does not define
conditions for propagation of the action potential.

METHODS

Experimental. The experimental data that are presented in this paper were all
achieved with the single sucrose-gap voltage-clamp technique (Beeler & Reuter,
1970a). This experimental approach has been modified in two ways since our
original report. Firstly, we have adopted a better bath grounding system, wherein
the test-bath is grounded through the summing junction of an operational amplifier
(New & Trautwein, 1972). Secondly, electronic switches permit the investigator to
produce a transition from current-clamp to voltage-clamp mode within 20 /ssec.
Thus he may produce a voltage-clamp at any time during a normal action potential

Mathematical. The bulk of the material presented herein represents a numerical
simulation of the action potential. This simulation is the result of the solution of a
system of eight, first order, simultaneous, non-linear differential equations. The
simulations were performed using a simulation system, Simcon (Anderson, Knopp
& Bassingthwaighte, 1970), which operates on a Control Data Corporation 3500
computer. This system permits the investigator to interact with a numerical model
written in FORTRAN from an on-line terminal. During the simulation, model
results are plotted on an oscilloscope at the investigator's terminal and he has the
ability to alter the model or the computational process during the simulation.
Moreover, he controls the over-all characteristics of the model through the inter-
active entry of an array of up to 300 parameters which define the model. The results
of each simulation are temporarily stored on magnetic disk and then may be re-
plotted to form figures, such as are used in this paper, or may be listed for more
detailed analysis.

The integration algorithm used to solve the differential equations is the Runge-
Kutta-Merson algorithm (Lange, 1960). This algorithm uses five evaluations of the
derivatives during each step of the integration, and produces both a result with
fourth-order accuracy, and a prediction of truncation error. The truncation error
estimate is used to control the step size of the integration procedure, in order to
optimize the time required for solution against the accuracy of the solution.

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

179
or conversely may release the preparation from the voltage-clamp at any time he
desires.

Any integration algorithm which incorporates an estimate of error in order to
control step size will have the maximum step size limited by the smallest time con-
stant in the system being integrated. In the model presented here, the time constant
for the activation of the sodium current is at least an order of magnitude faster
than any of the other time constants within the system. Moreover, this parameter
is in equilibrium with its steady-state value at all times except during the upstroke
of the action potential. Therefore, an algorithm was devised which monitors both
the difference between the value of this parameter and its steady-state value, and
the instantaneous rate of change of the membrane potential. If at any time during
the computation the parameter and its steady-state value differ by less than 0 004,
and if the rate of change of the membrane potential is also less than 0.5 V/sec, then
the algorithm ceases integrating this parameter. This increases integration speed in
two ways. Firstly, the system is reduced to seven simultaneous differential equa-
tions, a relatively minor gain. More importantly, however, the time constant govern-
ing the step size of the integration becomes an order of magnitude larger. During the
periods when this parameter is not being integrated, it is continually set to its steady-
state value as determined by the membrane potential, and the rate of change of this
parameter over the last integration step is monitored. If this rate of change exceeds
0-005/msec, then the parameter is 're-captured' and the system returns to integra-
ting all parameters. Incorporation of this algorithm, permits about a twentyfold
increase in computational speed for the over-all system, and a single action potential
can be computed in about 40 sec.

Model program. The primary model is a single space-clamped patch of membrane
which consists of a membrane capacity with four parallel current paths. Eight
parameters must be integrated to produce a solution to this model. These are the
membrane potential across the capacity, the intracellular calcium ion concentration
as it is affected by i,, and six activation or inactivation parameters for the various
conductances. At each step in
time, the Runge-Kutta-Merson integration
algorithm establishes a set of values for the variables being integrated (initial con-
ditions for the step) and provides these values: membrane potential, [Ca],, and six

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

180
conductance parameters; to a subprogram which computes the derivative for each
integrated variable. During this process, the individual ionic currents are deter-
mined and summed along with any 'externally applied' current to arrive at the
charging current for the membrane capacity, which then determines the derivative
of the membrane potential.

Within this basic computational approach, three different forms of simulation
are realized. The most common mode computes the action potential by starting the
integration algorithm with a set of initial conditions, and allowing the program to
proceed through subsequent integration steps. In the instance that a stimulus cur-
rent is desired, the derivative subprogram adds this external current to the ionic
currents during the appropriate time steps.

The second computational mode involves the simulation of an ideal voltage-clamp
experiment. This is done by setting the membrane potential equal to the desired
voltage-clamp stimulus. Computation is then reduced to the integration of the intra-
cellular calcium ion concentration as it is altered by the i,. In this mode the con-
ductance parameters for all channels can be expressed as simple exponential func-
tions and need not be integrated. The output in this instance is the sum of the
ionic currents from the various channels.

The third mode is an alternate approach to the simulation of the voltage-clamp
and incorporates the concept of an extracellular series resistance (Beeler & Reuter,
1970a). Here, the simulated voltage-clamp circuit controls the voltage across the
series combination of the membrane patch and a series resistance, RB. In this
instance,

iCIamp = (Vclamp - Vmembrane)IRs,

(1)
where Vmembr..
is the potential across the membrane patch. In order to simulate
this circuit, the derivatives for all integrated parameters including the membrane
potential are determined as if for an action potential, but at each integration step
iclamp is determined from eqn. (1) and applied as an 'external current' in the deter-
mination of the membrane potential derivative. This then forces the membrane
potential to follow the desired clamp potential. The majority of voltage-clamp
simulations presented in this paper were done with the latter approach using an R.
of 200 Q.

General

THEORY

Basis for the model

As noted, the general form of the model is that of a space-clamped
patch of membrane. The nominal area for this membrane is one square
centimetre, but it should be recognized that the majority of experimental
results on which this work is based have not provided an accurate estimate
of membrane area. The membrane capacity utilized in this model is set
at 1 ,uF/cm2 which is close to experimental values in the literature (Weid-
mann, 1970), and to the generally accepted value for the capacity of
biological membranes. All ionic current densities refer to 1 cm2. The
scaling of the individual ionic currents is chosen to provide current-
voltage relationships which match the best estimates obtained experi-
mentally, but which, when taken together, produce an acceptable shape
for the myocardial action potential. It should be noted, that the exact

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

181

TABLE 1. A, equations and values which define currents

'= 0-35{4(exp [0O04(V. + 85)]- l)/(exp [0 08(VI + 53)] + exp [0 04(V. + 53)])
+ 02(VI + 23)/(1-exp [-0-04(VI + 23)])}.

=t1L xi,

where

i.1 = 0 8(exp [0*04(VI + 77)]- 1)/exp [0 04(VI + 35)].

(4)

iNa = (gW' - M 3.hj+9ac)(Vm -ENJ,

where g.. = 4,

gNac = 0-003,

and ENa = 50.

where g, = 0 09, and

i.= ,.Ydfd.(Vm-E.),

(2)
(3)

(5)

(6)

(7)
In the equations above, currents (i) are in usA/cm2, voltages (E, V) are in mV, con-
ductances (g) are in mmho/Cm2, and xj, m, h, j, d andf are dimensionless. Membrane
potential, Vm, is taken as inside potential minus outside potential.

E= -82-3-13-0287 In [Ca],.

B, equations defining time derivatives in model
dI,/dt = -/Cm)OKI + ixL + iN, + ica

iternal)

(8)

where Cm = 1.

d[Ca]1Idt = -10-7.i + 007(10-7-[Ca]i).

(9)
(10)
(11)
where
(12)
and
In equations of B, times (t, r) are in msec, membrane capacity is in juF/cm2, [Ca],
is in mole/I, rate constants (a, ,) are in msec-1, and remaining units are as in A.
Eqns. 10-12 show the method of computing the dimensionless conductance para-
meters using y to represent such a parameter.

dy/dt = (y -Y)r/y,
'r, = 1/(ayx+fl0),
YOO = ayc(ayc+#fY)

C, defining function and values for rate constants (a or ,f)
ac = (0C exp [C2(Vm + C3)] +C4(Vm +C5))/(exp [C6(Vm +C3)] + C7).

Rate
con-
stant
(msec-1) (msec-1)
0.0005
0-0013

0,

A

02

(mV-1)
0-083
-0-06
°

am
Bm
ah
fih
ac
Af
cad
Ad
af
flj

°
-0-056
40
-0-25
0-126
1*7
0
-0-25
0 055
0.3
0
0*095
-0 01
0 07
-0*017
0*012
-0-008
0-0065 - 0*02

3
(mV)
50
20
47
72
77
22*5
78
32
-5
44
28
30

C4

((mV.msec)'-)

5
(mV)

0
0
-1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
47
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

06

(mV-1)
0 057
-0 04
-0 1
0
0

-0*082
-0*2
-0*1
-0*072
0*05
0*15
-0*2

(13)

07

1
1
- 1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

182
value of the membrane capacity has little effect on the over-all shape of
the computed action potential, with the sole exception of the rapid
upstroke. During the other phases of the action potential, the shape is
primarily determined by the time constants of the dynamic ionic currents.
At various times, experimental evidence has been presented to postulate
a total of eight different ionic conductance components in various cardiac
muscle preparations (Trautwein, 1973). The model presented here incor-
porates only four of those components. These include: an initial fast inward
current carried primarily by sodium, ioa; a secondary or slow inward
current, i8, carried mainly but not exclusively by calcium ions; a time-
activated outward current designated ix1; and a time-independent potas-
sium outward current designated iK1. The rationale for the omission of the
other currents will be presented in the sections to follow.

The complete set of equations and constants that define the model are
given in Table 1. The general formulation for the ionic currents follows
the concepts introduced by Hodgkin & Huxley (1952). Eqn. (6) is an
example of a linear current term. When all slow inward current pathways
are open or fully activated, is is determined by the linear current-voltage
relation: gs (Vm-EE) (Reuter, 1973; Reuter & Scholz, 1976). At any point
in time, however, only a fraction of the pathways are open, and the
dimensionless conductance parameters d and f express the degree of
activation and inactivation of this current. These parameters are functions
of both membrane potential, Vm, and time. Investigations of the outward
currents in Purkinje fibres have shown that when fully activated these
currents have a non-linear, rectifying, current-voltage relationship. In
order to characterize these currents, McAllister et al. (1975) adopted a
formulation that is analogous to the linear case. This is shown in eqn. (3),
where the non-linear current-voltage relation for the fully activated state,
ixi, is multiplied by the dimensionless activation parameter, xl.
The formulation for the time and voltage dependence of the activation
parameters follows the approach first proposed by Hodgkin & Huxley
(1952). With this approach, one defines a steady-state value for each
activation parameter, which value varies between 0 and 1 over the voltage
range of interest. This is referred to as the steady-state curve. The second
potential dependent parameter directly related to the activation para-
meter is its time constant as a function of membrane potential. Utilizing
these two factors, the rate of change of the activation parameter at any
given moment is expressed by eqn. (10). In order to define the values of the
steady-state curve, y,,,, and the time constant curve, ry, use is made of
two rate-constant functions which are simply functions of membrane
potential (Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952). These rate constants, ay and fly,
then can be used to define the time constant curve and the steady-state

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

183
curve according to eqns. (11) and (12). In order to simplify the reporting
of the actual values used in this model, we have expressed the alphas and
betas entirely in terms of a generalized function, with eight defining
coefficients. Table 1 C gives the equation, and the defining coefficients for
all rate constants.

Outward currents

The investigation of time-dependent outward currents in ventricular
myocardium has been limited. This limitation arises primarily from the
complication of the experimental method by the likely accumulation of
potassium ions within the extracellular spaces of the myocardial muscle
preparation during the long-lasting depolarizing voltage-clamps required
for the analysis of these currents (McGuigan, 1974; Cleemann & Morad,
1976). Experimental work with the cardiac Purkinje fibre by Noble &
Tsien (1968, 1969) has indicated the possible presence of three time-
activated outward currents ('K2, i,1 and i.2), and a time-independent
potassium current exhibiting inward-going rectification (i~K). Available
experimental evidence in working ventricular myocardium, however, can
produce convincing evidence only for the presence of a single time-
activated outward current, ix1, and for the background current, iK,
(Beeler & Reuter, 1970a, and unpublished; McGuigan, 1974). The pace-
maker potassium current, iK2 (Noble & Tsien, 1968), seen in the cardiac
Purkinje fibre, is probably not active in ventricular myocardium which
does not normally exhibit spontaneous depolarization. The very slowly
activated outward current, ix2, seen by Noble & Tsien (1969) is either
not present in myocardial tissue, or is masked by the effects of extra-
cellular potassium ion accumulation. Since the time constants of activa-
tion of ix2 are extremely slow in comparison with a single action potential,
this current component was not considered further in the present recon-
struction. In an earlier version of our model, where ix2 was included, we
found that this current had a major influence on the shape of the action
potential only during very rapid stimulation.

Although ixi is quite variable in size in ventricular myocardial fibres
from different species, we have adopted the formulation of McAllister et al.
(1975), for both the time-activated outward current ix, and the time-
independent outward current iK,. These formulations are given in eqns.
(2), (3), and (4) of Table 1, and the fully activated current-voltage rela-
tions are plotted in Fig. 1. In converting the formulae from those provided
by McAllister et al. (1975), we re-scaled certain of the terms in the current-
voltage relations and shifted these relations along the voltage axis.
Although the general rationale behind this procedure was to account for
the difference in extracellular potassium ion concentration between the

1. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

184
2-7 mm of their model and 5-4 mm which we seek to model, the ultimate
criterion adopted by us was to match current-voltage relations seen in
ventricular myocardium, and to realize a reasonable plateau and re-
polarization conformation for our computed action potential.

10

E

A

ix,

(mV)

Fig. 1. A, the fully activated current-voltage relationship for potassium; i.,
is the maximum current that can be obtained for the time-activated outward
current; iK, is the background outward current which is present in the
model. B, the steady-state value for the activation parameter, xl, and
values for ri. The ordinate is dimensionless for xl and is in sec for T..

It should be noted that the first term in the 'Kl formulation can be taken to
represent the residual effect of iK2' the pace-maker current (Noble & Tsien, 1968).
Although there is no evidence that this current participates in a dynamic form in
the normal myocardial action potential, it is conceivable that such a current is
present in these preparations, but has an activation range sufficiently negative
relative to the normal resting potential, that it does not participate dynamically
in the formation of the action potential. Experimental evidence in potential ranges
more negative than the resting potential has not been pursued in myocardial pre-
parations, and therefore cannot assist in the resolution of this question.

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

185
The governing equations for the xl activation parameters as given in
Table 1 are identical to those provided by McAllister et al. (1975). The
steady-state values for the activation parameter, x1,, and its time con-
stants, TX1, are plotted as a function of membrane potential in Fig. 1.
Inward sodium current

al.

Experimental evidence is only partially available for the inward sodium
current, iNa, in cardiac muscle. We have chosen, in line with work in other
tissues, to model the dynamic sodium inward current as a transient
mechanism, wherein the equivalent conductance of the membrane for
sodium is expressed as a maximum conductance multiplied by activation
and inactivation parameters. The fundamental limitations of voltage-
clamps applied to cardiac muscle have prevented the assessment of
the activation kinetics of iNa at normal temperatures. Therefore, like
McAllister et
(1975), we have adopted the formulation for the
sodium activation parameter, m, determined for squid axon by Hodgkin
& Huxley (1952).

The inactivation process for iNa is somewhat more amenable to study
using conditioning potentials produced by voltage-clamp, depolarization
of the membrane with potassium chloride, or depolarization produced by
the action potential. Indeed, the earliest works in this area by Weidmann
(1955 a) related to the inactivation process for the upstroke of the Purkinje
fibre action potential. Beeler & Reuter (1970a) reported measurements of
the steady-state inactivation curve, and much of this question has been
re-investigated recently by Gettes & Reuter (1974). All of these experi-
ments produce similar results in terms of the location and slope of the
steady-state inactivation curve, h.. The evidence for the time constant
for h, however, is not as strong. Voltage-clamp experiments would indicate
that the inactivation process for iNa must be complete within 10 msec or
less at most potential levels and a similar conclusion can be drawn from
the duration of the initial spike of the normal cardiac action potential.
Haas, Kern, Einwachter & Tarr (1971) and Gettes & Reuter (1974),
however, provided strong evidence to the effect that re-activation of iNa
proceeds at a much slower rate than inactivation. (Inactivation cor-
responds to changes in the parameter, h, from unity towards zero, or the
shutting off of the sodium channel during depolarization, while re-activa-
tion corresponds to the return of this parameter to a unity value upon
re-polarization as the sodium channel once again becomes available for
activation.) The finding that the re-activation process is much slower than
the inactivation process cannot be stimulated with a single, simple con-
ductance parameter for inactivation. Therefore, following the suggestion
by Haas et al. (1971) we have introduced in this model a second

C. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

186
inactivation parameter designated j, such that the formulation for iNa
becomes that of eqn. (5).

The steady-state inactivation parameter values jr,. and hCo

have
identical dependence on membrane potential whereas their time constants
are significantly different. The values for the rate constants for these two
parameters, along with those for m are found in Table 1 and the steady-
state values and time constants are plotted in Fig. 2. The rate constants

1

T7m
Th'r
100 - 0.25
(msec)

(msec)

I

-40

(mV)

+40

Fig. 2. A, time constants, and B, steady-state values for the activation
(m.) and inactivation (ha,,, j.) parameters of the sodium conductance,
g9., as functions of membrane potential.

for h were chosen by considering the effect of the time constant of h on the
excitability of the model, and the shape of the spike of the computed
action potential.

The values for rj were derived by matching the experimental results of
Gettes & Reuter (1974) for potentials more negative than -60 mV and
then 'bending' the rj curve to be roughly parallel to Th at more positive

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

187
potentials. The steady-state inactivation curves, j, and h., were matched
to our earlier experimental results (Beeler & Reuter, 1970 a; Gettes &
Reuter, 1974). The values for the m, h and j steady-state functions and
time constants, are plotted against membrane potential in Fig. 2.

The values in the model for the fully activated sodium conductance,
gNa, for the background sodium conductance, gNac, are 4-0 and 0-003
mmho/cm2, respectively. These values, the h parameter time constants, and
the absolute locations of the h., and mcn curves were arrived at empirically
by considering the interrelationships between the excitability of the
model, the maximum upstroke velocity, and the peak and width of the
action potential spike. The location of hc,, on the voltage axis and its
steepness agree with the experimental results by Gettes & Reuter (1974)
but h. is shifted by 5 mV towards negative potentials relative to the
experimental results by Beeler & Reuter (1970a). The maximum amount
of allowable cross-over between the steady-state curves for h., and mso is
determined from the membrane current-voltage relationships, as no
discernible 'notch' due to sodium has been observed experimentally in
these curves. Once this separation is established, the relative location of
both curves determines the threshold for the action potential. Finally,
the maximum value of the action potential spike and the width of the
spike are strongly determined by a combination of the inactivation time
constant for sodium, Th, and the maximum conductance, gNa- We sought
to model an excitation phase for the action potential which had a reason-
ably low threshold (-60 mV) achieved a maximum rate of rise of at least
115 V/sec, and which realized a peak at about + 30 mV. The value for the
steady-state sodium conductance, gNaC, was chosen to produce a steady
sodium leak of about 0 4 ,uA/cm2 at the resting potential. The sodium
reversal potential, ENa, was chosen in this model at 50 mV.

It should be noted that the formulation for sodium inactivation that we have
adopted implies that the experimental approaches to measuring the steady-state
inactivation curve with voltage-clamp or KCl depolarization will produce a curve
that is the product of h.0 and j0*. It is worth considering, then, the difference be-
tween the curves hA, and ho,2 (since j. equals h.o) that are likely to occur in these
tissues. One means of expressing an inactivation curve, is with the following equa-
tion (Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952):

hco = 1/( +exp [(Vm-Vh)IS]).

Here, the curve is characterized by a slope factor, S, and a half-point for the curve,
Vb. The potential Vh is determined as that voltage at which h.3 is 0-5. The slope
factor, S, is then:

S = (-4~j

(

V~mI m = Vh)

If the measured curve were indeed the square of the true inactivation curve, then
the measurement of the slope, taken at the half-point of the squared curve, will

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

188
differ from the slope of the true inactivation curve by only 17 %. The primary
difference is that the half-point of the squared curve is shifted relative to that of the
true curve. For example, in our earlier work we reported a J{ of -55 mV for the
sodium inactivation curve, and a slope factor of 3 mV. If indeed we were measuring
the square of an inactivation curve, then the true inactivation curve would have had
a slope of 3-5 mV, and the true inactivation curve would have been located at about
-52 mV. These differences are smaller than the experimental error in the estimates.
In arriving at the formulation used in this model, we fitted the rate constant
equations for the sodium inactivation curves for both jO, and h.0 to the experi-
mental values that we had observed previously. For completeness, we have also
calculated an equivalent set of rate constants which could be used under the assump-
tion that our published figures represented an observation of j. .hc. This latter
formulation produces no significant changes in the model.
As a further note, Gettes & Reuter (1974) discussed alternative formulations of
iads
activation and inactivation, for example, coupled activation-inactivation
kinetics (Goldman, 1975). We have adopted the approach proposed by Haas et al.
(1971) because of its simplicity and its similarity to the other activation and in-
activation mechanisms used in this model. By adopting this approach we do not
mean to imply a belief in one physical alternative over the other, but, rather, we
recognize that present experimental evidence will not support the definition of a
more elaborate scheme. The resolution of the question as to what sort of process is
truly involved will require an experimental approach which provides extremely
close control of the membrane potential during the flow of 'N. and realization of
such a controlled cardiac muscle preparation may be unlikely with methods avail-
able today.
Slow inward current

The characterization of i8 has probably received more experimental
attention than other current component. Available evidence from most
laboratories indicates that in mammalian ventricular myocardium this
current is carried predominantly by calcium ions when the preparations
are superfused with physiological salt solutions containing calcium con-
centrations in the range 1-10 mm (for review see Reuter, 1973; Reuter &
Scholz, 1976). This current is treated as a transient inward current, with
simple activation and inactivation parameters multiplying a maximum
conductance value (eqn. (6)). The activation parameter, d, and the inacti-
vation parameter, f, cross-over strongly in the plateau range of potentials
for the cardiac action potential (Fig. 3).

The shapes and locations of the activation and inactivation curves have
been fairly well determined by G. W. Beeler and H. Reuter (unpublished),
Bassingthwaighte & Reuter (1972), Reuter (1973, 1974), Trautwein,
McDonald & Tripathi (1975), and Reuter & Scholz (1976). The curves used
in defining this model represent a collation of the results obtained by
Beeler & Reuter (1970b), Reuter (1973, 1974), and Gettes & Reuter
(1974) and agree with recently published dX and fX, curves of Trautwein
et al. (1975) and Reuter & Scholz (1976). The steady-state activation and
inactivation curves, and the time constants as functions of membrane

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

189
potential are shown in Fig. 3. Voltage-clamp studies indicate that the
activation time constants, md, for i8 reach a maximum of 40 msec at -20
mV (Reuter & Scholz, 1976).

The time constant curve for the inactivation parameter, f, represents
a significant anomaly, when it is compared with the time constants deter-
mined for most other activation or inactivation parameters in excitable
tissues. These curves have generally been found to be roughly bell-shaped,
with the maximum value at approximately the half-point of the activa-
tion or inactivation parameter in question. The time constant for f,

Td

Tf

B

fG

do

-80

-40

0

(mV)

+40

Fig. 3. A, time constants and B, steady-state values for the activation
(d.) and inactivation (f,) parameters of the slow inward conductance,
98, as functions of membrane potential.

however, appears from the best experimental evidence to be a continually
increasing function of membrane potential. Although it is possible that
this function might decrease at potentials more positive than + 15 mV,

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

190
there is no experimental evidence for a maximum in the range of -20 mV
where the f. curve has its half-point. For cat papillary muscle New &
Trautwein (1972) described a U-shaped relation between Tr and membrane
potential in the range -40 to + 40 mV. Although their finding has been
confirmed by Kohlhardt, Krause, Kubler & Herdey (1975), Trautwein et
al. (1975) pointed out that the increase in Tf at negative potentials is the
result of an analytical error, and in principle they confirmed the shape of
Tr vs. V. relationship obtained by Beeler & Reuter (1970b) and Gettes &
Reuter (1974) (see also Reuter & Scholz, 1976). Another point of experi-
mental discrepancy relates to the time constants of inactivation and of
reactivation of is. While Gettes & Reuter (1974) did not find a major
difference between these two time constants in pig and calf ventricular
muscle, Kohlhardt et al. (1975) did describe such a difference in cat
papillary muscle (cf. Reuter & Scholz, 1976).

Any attempt at modelling the influx of calcium into a muscle cell
requires particular attention to the formulation adopted for the reversal
potential for is. In order for the contractile proteins of this tissue to relax,
the over-all intracellular calcium ion concentration at rest must be in the
range between 1 and 3 x 10-I M. If one then computes the influx of cal-
cium from voltage-clamp experiments, or indeed from this model, the
intracellular calcium ion concentration will increase significantly, and
bring about a reduction in the potential at which the current reverses and
becomes outward. Bassingthwaighte & Reuter (1972) attempted a study
of the interrelationship between clamped membrane potential, observed
i8, and the apparent reversal potential. Their results indicate that the
reversal potential for is is much less positive than would be predicted from
a simple consideration of resting calcium levels in the muscle. Moreover,
their results indicate a very rapid shift in reversal potential for calcium
down to values as low as + 40 mV within 20 msec of the application of a
voltage-clamp step. In their discussion, Bassingthwaighte & Reuter
(1972) postulated that the influx of calcium could be modelled to a first
approximation by treating the calcium current as though it flowed into a
volume of distribution that was only a few percent of total cell volume.
They were not able, however, to precisely determine the resting level of
the calcium concentration in that distribution space. In a recent study
on calf ventricular trabeculae Reuter & Scholz (1976) have shown that the
reversal potential, E., of is depends on the permeability ratio for calcium,
sodium and potassium ions. The low Es of less than + 40 mV could be
explained by a hundred times higher permeability of these conductance
channels for calcium ions than for sodium or potassium ions. However,
since the concentrations of sodium and potassium ions in the bulk solu-
tions are much higher than those of calcium ions, a considerable fraction

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

191
of i8 is carried by the monovalent cations. This leads to a reversal potential
of i4 which does not follow a simple Nernst relation. In calf trabeculae
Reuter & Scholz (1976) have not observed major shifts of E8 during
depolarizing clamp steps.

In order to produce a first approximation to the experimental results
of Bassingthwaighte & Reuter (1972), we have chosen to model the intra-
cellular handling of calcium as though it flows into a small distribution
volume within the cell, from which it is removed by an uptake mechanism
which will reduce the calcium concentration in that compartment expo-
nentially with time to a level of 10-I M. The rate constant for this uptake
is set at 70 sec'. Thus the computer programme integrates the intra-
cellular calcium ion concentration, utilizing eqn. (9) for the derivative.
The reversal potential, Es, is then calculated from [Ca2+]i with the Nernst
equation, as in eqn. (7). Although, as stated above, ES is a mixed reversal
potential, the use of eqn. (7) simplified our calculations.

The final element relative to calcium movement in the model is that of
the fully activated conductance gs, which is on the order of 0-1 m-mho/cm2
(Reuter & Scholz, 1976). The rate constant for uptake of calcium within
the model was arrived at empirically by consideration of the plateau
shape and of the over-all duration for the simulated action potential. The
effects of modifications in the calcium handling system will be considered
in the Results section.
Other currents

Earlier in this section it was indicated that at least four other current
components have at one time or another been postulated to exist in cardiac
muscle. These include a slow component ofinward sodium current (Reuter,
1968), a dynamic chloride current (Dudel, Peper, Rudel & Trautwein,
1967; Reuter, 1968; Fozzard & Hiraoka, 1973) and the two additional
time varying outward currents (iK2 and i.,; Noble & Tsien, 1968, 1969).
The latter have been described clearly only for Purkinje fibres, and were
discussed earlier. We have omitted the slow sodium current from this
model because it is clear now that it is not a separable component of i4
(Vitek & Trautwein, 1971). The evidence for the dynamic inward move-
ment of chloride is very strong in cardiac Purkinje fibres, but this current
component does not appear to be present to any significant degree in
ventricular myocardial preparations. In their report of the cardiac
Purkinje fibre model, McAllister et al. (1975) note that the chloride current
is required to produce a notch in the action potential, whereas our model
exhibits such a notch without that component. If such a current is added
to this model, its sole effect is to accentuate the notch between the spike
of the action potential and the beginning of the plateau phase. This

7

PHY 268

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

192
discrepancy apparently results from the activation of iA, which for inside
positive potentials is at least twice as fast in the Purkinje fibre model as
it is here. Moreover, the peak positive potential in their model is + 40 mV
as opposed to + 28 mV in our model. The combined effect is that 12 msec
into the action potential, where the minimum of the notch occurs, i81 in
their model is virtually fully activated, while in this model, i8 is about half-
activated at that time. Thus the notch in our model derives from the
continued activation of i8, superimposed on a relatively constant outward
current, whereas in the Purkinje model it is the result of a transient re-
polarizing current component superimposed on a relatively constant
inward current.

+40

-40-

-80

\

~~~~~~~~(msec)

Fig. 4. The standard computed action potential (see text for details).

RESULTS

Action potential and Vmax

The fundamental simulation produced by this model is the reproduction
of a typical myocardial action potential as depicted in Fig. 4. The threshold
is at -60 mV and the upstroke velocity of the action potential is
115 V/sec. After the initial spike the action potential reaches a maximum
during the plateau phase of +17 mV and remains at inside positive
potential levels for 153 msec. The maximum rate of repolarization is

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

193
about 11 V/sec, and the duration of the action potential measured at
the point where re-polarization is 90 % complete is 285 msec. The resting
potential is -84 mV.

One of the first questions pursued with the basic model was whether
the altered formulation of iNa did indeed match the experimental results
of Gettes & Reuter (1974). One of the basic findings in their paper is the
observation of two different curves for the rate of rise of the action poten-
tial as a function of starting potential, depending upon the method of
measurement. If the conditioning depolarization which alters the rate of

0

0
-90

0

-80

-70

(mV)

-60

Fig. 5. Relative action potential upstroke velocity (Pm.), and product
of Na inactivation variables (h.j) as functions of starting potential for
two experimental simulations. Right-hand curve is the product of h.j
plotted with values of rmax (0) which result after a 500 msec conditioning
clamp to voltage V,. Left-hand curve is the inactivation product with
V.. (0) values found when the stimulation is at different Vm during the re-
polarization phase of a standard action potential.

rise of the action potential is accomplished with potassium chloride, or
with a long-lasting voltage-clamp step, then the half-inactivation (Vh) of
the upstroke of the cardiac action potential occurs in a potential range
between 15 and 25 mV positive to the resting potential. If, on the other
hand, an attempt is made to excite an action potential from a given mem-
brane potential during the re-polarization phase of the preceding action
potentials, which is often called 'membrane responsiveness' in the cardiac

7-2

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

194
muscle literature, the upstroke of the extrasystolic action potential is
found to be half-inactivated at much more negative potentials. This dif-
ference is due to the fact that re-activation of iNa is not an instantaneous
function of the membrane potential. The simulation performed here
involved the recreation of that basic experiment.

Two different sets of upstroke velocities were determined and are plotted
in Fig. 5. For the first set, the membrane potential was pre-conditioned
with a voltage-clamp step to various potential levels for 500 msec,
and then released from clamp and stimulated. If the clamp duration is
greater than Th, but less than Tj, the observed maximum rate of rise of the
action potential is related primarily to the inactivation curve, h.. If the
clamp duration is greater than both Th and Tj, as simulated here, the
product of ho .j0, will govern Vmax, but the result is very similar (see
Discussion, p. 15). This has been confirmed with clamp durations as short
as 50 msec where the observed velocities fall a few millivolts to the right
of those plotted in Fig. 5 for 500 msec clamps. The alternative experiment
is performed by allowing the membrane to re-polarize at the end of the
action potential to the membrane potential desired, at which point the
stimulation of a second action potential is attempted.

The measurements of Fig. 5 produce a picture similar to the experi-
mental results of Gettes & Reuter (1974). In order to show more clearly
the relationship between inactivation and the peak upstroke velocity in
this experiment, we have also plotted the product of the inactivation
variables, h.j, as a continuous function of Vm on the same graph. The
observed velocity points fall close to these curves except for the points
measured early in re-polarization. These are lower due to compounding
factors such as ix and [Ca]i which are elevated at this point in the action
potential and which tend to further slow the observed rate of rise. It is
clear from this Figure that the 'membrane responsiveness' curve utilizing
the re-polarization of the preceding action potential to set the initial
potential does not reflect the sodium inactivation curves in any meaning-
ful way. Rather, it is dominated by the rate of re-polarization of the con-
ditioning action potential and by the time that this allows the slow
variable, j, to re-activate.

Determinants of action potential duration

One of the major questions which investigators have sought to resolve
is which ionic current is primarily responsible for the determination of the
duration of the myocardial action potential. This question is of interest
because the influx of calcium during the action potential occurs primarily
during the plateau phase, and hence the contractile state of the prepara-
tion will depend to a certain degree on action potential duration. In a

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

195
system such as that modelled here, the plateau phase of the action poten-
tial is determined by the antagonism between the outward currents, iK,
and i.,, and the inward current, is. Thus, the termination of the plateau
phase of the action potential could result from either the activation of il
or the inactivation of i8. Fig. 6 shows the values for the is inactivation
parameter, f, and the il activation parameter, xl, during the standard
computed action potential. Clearly both of these parameters change

A

+30 - B

-E

0--

-30 -

-60 -

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~41

Soo

\

\

~~~~~~~~Soo
~~~~~~~(msec)

-90-
Fig. 6. A, variation of slow inward current inactivation parameter, f, and
outward current activation parameter, xl, during B, a standard action
potential.

throughout the plateau phase of the action potential, although f under-
goes a greater fractional change during the plateau than does x1. The
curves in Fig. 6 provide little insight into the question, however, as either
mechanism might be deemed responsible. Giebisch & Weidmann (1971)
studied this question in sheep ventricular trabeculae using a voltage-clamp,
and concluded that the decline of the inward current was the dominant
factor. Similar conclusions were reached by Beeler & Reuter (1970b), New
& Trautwein (1972), and Reuter & Scholz (1976). McAllister et al. (1975),
however, conclude that the activation of il is more important in cardiac
Purkinje fibres.

196

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

Given that our model is an admixture of results obtained from Purkinje
fibres for the outward currents, and from ventricular myocardium for the
inward current, we sought to gain further insight from experimentation
on the model. One way of doing this is to produce systematic alterations
of the individual ionic currents. The two panels of Fig. 7 show results of

+40j A

0

-40

-80

.-a

I.E.

-40

-80

500
(msec)

igs.1'1

500
(Msec)

Fig. 7. The effects of altering i, and i.l parameters. A, five action potentials
showing the relative effects of altering the fully activated currents for i
and i4 by ± 10 %. The greater change is caused by alterations of i. B.
three action potentials showing the effect of increasing the time constants
for x1 and f by factors of 2. Slowing the inactivation of i. produces the
greater changes. (Standard action potential indicated by S.)

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

197
such alterations. In the first instance (Fig. 7A), the fully activated current
values for i., and for is were changed by + 10 % individually. A 10 %
change in s produces a larger alteration in action potential duration, than
does an equivalent change in ixL. Alternatively, one can change the time
constant for the two parameters in question. In Fig. 7 B are shown the
action potentials which result when the time constants for f and x1 are
individually increased by a factor of two. Again, the duration of the action
potential is significantly more sensitive to an alteration in i8 inactivation
time than it is to an equivalent alteration in ix, activation time.

Although these results might argue for the decline in is being the
dominant factor in action potential length, we have also considered the
question of the effect of the larger time constant for xl at the resting poten-
tial (233 msec) compared to that for f at that potential (54 msec). The
shortening of the action potentials which occurs when the stimulus fre-
quency is increased or when extrasystoles are interpolated within a train
of action potentials at constant frequency is a well known phenomenon,
and is reproduced by this model. As the time interval between action
potentials is decreased, the variables xl and f have less time to recover
(deactivate and re-activate, respectively). Thus, at the start of the action
potential in question, ix, is already partially activated, and i8 is already
partially inactivated. Both effects will shorten the action potential, but
presumably the ix, effect may dominate since its longer time constant will
permit less recovery.
In order to test this presumption, we stimulated the model action
potential at various frequencies between 1 and 4/sec, and interpolated
extrasystoles at intervals from 667 msec down to 300 msec into a steady
1/sec train. As expected, the action potential duration decreases as the
proximity to the preceding action potential gets smaller. Moreover, the
change in duration begins to occur at the proximity where xl begins to
build up, thus confirming the presumption that activation of xl is import-
ant for action potential shortening in this case even though the duration
decreases most drastically when f decreases. These results obtained with
the model action potential are very similar to those obtained experiment-
ally by Gettes, Morehouse & Surawicz (1972).

In the process of questioning the relative importance of the inward and
outward currents for re-polarization, we have also sought a simple experi-
ment that might be applied to any cardiac tissue in order to assess the
roles of these currents. Kass & Tsien (1976) and Reuter & Scholz (1976)
have suggested that a pulse of depolarizing current applied during the
early stages of the action potential ought to separate the effects. If i
predominates, the added depolarization from such a current should in-
crease the activation of xl and thus shorten the action potential. If i5 is

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

198
dominant, on the other hand, the long time constants for f at inside
positive potentials will mean that the inactivation of i8 will be little
changed, and the action potential may then be prolonged by the pro-
longed depolarization produced by the test current.

Fig. 8A shows an experimental test of this hypothesis on Purkinje
fibres and on ventricular myocardium from calf hearts. The Purkinje

(b)

(

200 msec

+40

A(a)

0J

-80

E

1-

J

-80 J
Fig. 8. A, superimposed action potentials recorded from (a) a calf Purkinje
fibre and (b) a calf ventricular trabecula in Tyrode solution. Note shortening
of the action potential duration after application of constant depolarizing
current pulses at the beginning of the plateau phase in case of the Purkinje
fibre (from Kass & Tsien, 1976) and modest lengthening in case of the
ventricular trabeculae (H. Reuter, unpublished). B, corresponding recon-
structions. (See text for details.)

fibre result (Kass & Tsien, 1976), a shortening of the action potential after
depolarizing current pulses at the beginning of the plateau, is as one would
expect from the model of McAllister et al. (1975), while the ventricular
myocardial preparation shows a modest prolongation of the action poten-
tial under similar conditions indicating less influence of time-activated
outward current. Our own experiments in dog (Beeler & Reuter, 1970a),

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

199
sheep, calf and cat hearts (Gettes & Reuter, 1974; Reuter & Scholz, 1976)
confirm the species difference in time-activated outward current, this
current being larger in dog and cat than in sheep or calf ventricular fibres.
Fig. 8 B is a simulation of two ventricular myocardium experiments. The
right-hand panel (a) is our standard reconstruction which shows virtually
no effect of the imposed current pulses on the action potential duration.
The left-hand panel (b) represents a modified model which may be more
closely applicable to myocardial fibres with large i., and which mimics
the Purkinje fibre results in Fig. 8A (see also Kass & Tsien, 1976, Fig. 4C).
In this modified model, the relative importance of i,} and i,1 for re-
polarization was reversed by reducing g to two thirds its normal value,
and increasing i., to twice normal. In order to retain a normal spike and
early plateau, iK1 was also reduced to one half normal. Oppositely directed
changes in the same parameters produce a model which shows clear
prolongation of the action potential when depolarizing currents are
applied, confirming that this simple experiment will demonstrate the rela-
tive dependence of action potential duration upon these two currents.

All-or-nothing re-polarization

One of the experimental methods that has been used in the past to
characterize the plateau phase of the cardiac action potential, is to attempt
to force premature re-polarization of the action potential by applying
a constant current stimulus during the plateau phase of the action poten-
tial (Weidmann, 1951). This procedure generally shows that premature
re-polarization will occur if the current drops the membrane potential
below a threshold level, and that this threshold is at progressively more
positive potentials later in the action potential (Vassalle, 1966). In the
process of investigating this experiment with the model, we altered the
experimental method by imposing a brief voltage clamp during the action
potential (Fig. 9). When such a clamp is imposed either experimentally or
on the model, a decaying tail of inward current is observed if the mem-
brane potential during the clamp is more negative than the normal action
potential level. If the voltage-clamp is released at a time when the current
tail is still inward, the membrane will tend to depolarize a second time
and follow its normal course of re-polarization. Otherwise, i.e. if the net
current is outward, the membrane potential will re-polarize prematurely.
Examples of these phenomena in the model are given in the four panels
of Fig. 10. Here, voltage-clamps have been imposed at various intervals
of delay after the stimulus to the action potential, and held for varying
times. Analysis of these data shows that the duration of the clamp needed
to force premature re-polarization at any given potential level is directly
related to the time constant for the activation parameter, Td, for is at that

C. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

200
potential level. Thus the clamp brings about a reduction in inward current
by deactivation of i8. If this process is not completed before the time when
the membrane potential is released from clamp, then is re-activates and
produces a second depolarization to potential levels equal to or beyond
those which would be achieved by the normal action potential. This can
be seen most clearly in Fig. 9 C and Fig. 10 D. The interaction between the

C

D

0-

A

(mV)

-

0-

(mV)

B

200 msec

Fig. 9. All-or-nothing re-polarization in a dog ventricular trabecula: A, C,
hyperpolarizing clamp steps applied 50 msec or B, D, 120 msec after the
beginning of the action potential; A, B, clamp steps (50 msec duration) to
different potential levels, or C, D, for different times (10-60 msec duration;
all-or-nothing response is best illustrated in C.

on-going inactivation of i5 and the activation of i.1 brings about a steadily
higher potential level at which a clamp of any given duration will bring
about all-or-nothing re-polarization. This can be seen by comparing the
voltage levels at which the action potential repolarizes prematurely in
A-C of Fig. 10 (cf. Fig. 9A, B), and agrees with the experimental reports
of Vassalle (1966), Reuter & Beeler (1971), and McAllister et al. (1975).

Oscillatory potentials

Although the electrical characteristics of the working myocardium are
such that these preparations seldom produce spontaneous activity,
numerous experimental conditions have been created where such observa-
tions can be made. Reuter & Scholz (1968) found that preparations in a
low sodium, high calcium medium produced membrane potential oscilla-
tions when depolarized with outward current. More recently, Katzung

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

201
(1975) has reported a series of experiments on ventricular myocardial
preparations in a sucrose gap, wherein a steady depolarizing current
brings about oscillatory potentials in working myocardium in the absence
of any other ionic or pharmacologic intervention. This mechanism can be
readily simulated in the model as seen in Fig. 11 which shows the model
response to two different steady depolarizing currents. At a moderate
depolarization a stable oscillation of about one every 1-3 see results. At

+401

01

E

-40

V

X

-80JI

+402

-80

B

>

~~~~~~~~(msec)

D

(msec)

Fig. 10. All-or-nothing re-polarization induced by voltage-clamps imposed
during the plateau of a simulated action potential. A, voltage-clamps com-
mence 25 msec after the stimulus, last for 35 msec, and are at levels of
- 25, - 30, - 35, and -40 mV. B, clamps are 35 msec duration, are imposed
75 msec after the stimulus, and are at voltage levels of - 25, -30, -35 and
-40 mV. C, voltage-clamps are 30 msec duration, imposed 125 msec after
stimulus, at voltage levels -20, -25, -30, and -35 mV. D, effects of
varying the duration of voltage-clamps which start 25 msec after the
stimulus at the -35 mV level; durations are 25, 35, 45 and 55 msec.

still larger depolarizations, the model exhibits a damped oscillation
around a stable potential level at -20 mV. These results match quite
well the experimental findings by Reuter & Scholz (1968) and by Katzung
(1975).

The two panels of Fig. 12 show the ionic current dependencies of this
oscillatory behaviour of the membrane. Fig. 12A shows two tracings

2. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

202
created with a steady current of 2 1 ,uA/cm2. The earlier tracing is the basic
model, while the later tracing was simulated with the conductance for the
NSn, set to zero such as might occur in the presence of
sodium current,
tetrodotoxin or in Na-free solution (Katzung, 1975; Reuter & Scholz,

B

E

E

-40

-80

Fig. 11. Oscillatory potentials created with steady outward currents

of: A, 2*3 flA/cm2 and B, 2 8 fA/cm2.

1968). The depolarization of the earliest action potential is brought about
by the active sodium system in the standard model. The subsequent
repolarization, however, does not proceed to sufficiently negative values

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

203
to allow the re-activation of the sodium system. Thus the second and sub-
sequent oscillations brought about by the steady outward current produce
virtually identically shaped action potentials for the two reconstructions,
and the only difference in the action potential trains observed is the time
delay created at the occurrence of the first action potential.

+40

0

E

-40-

-80 -

0-8 -

0 -

+30-

0-

2

-60

B

2
(sec)

Fig. 12. A, effect on the oscillatory potentials of eliminating the dynamic
sodium inward current, in. The earlier tracing is normal model, the later
one is model without ix.. B, membrane potential and kinetic parameters
observed during a single cycle of A. Activation and inactivation parameters
for i., d and f, and isl activation parameter, xl, are plotted above the
oscillatory membrane potential.

204

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

Since Fig. 12A demonstrates that the oscillatory behaviour is not a
phenomenon which depends on YNa, it is of interest to investigate further
the ionic conductance mechanisms responsible for this oscillation. Fig.
12 B shows a single cycle of the oscillations from the upper panel plotted
along with the values for the conductance parameters which moderate i.
and il. During the slow depolarization phase the change in membrane
potential results from a slow decay of the x1 outward current. At about
-40 mV, i8 is progressively activated bringing about an increasing speed
of depolarization of the membrane. Subsequently, the combined factors
of the inactivation of i8 and the activation it
bring about repolarization
to about -70 mV. Thus this oscillatory behaviour is a 'slow response'
dependent on i8. As a final note, oscillatory behaviour of the sort shown
here can be readily produced in the model in the absence of a stimulus by
simply increasing the leak conductance to sodium, gNaC, eightfold.

Calcium mechanism

A common finding in cardiac electrophysiology is a shortening of the
action potential duration with increasing extracellular calcium ion con-
centration. On face value, one might expect that the calcium inward
current would be increased in this situation, owing to an increased driving
force, and ought to bring about an increase in action potential duration.
This, however, is seen only at very low rate of stimulation (<0.1 Hz;
Niedergerke & Orkand, 1966; Bassingthwaighte, Fry & McGuigan, 1976),
while at higher driving rates the action potential duration shortens. The
reason for this apparent discrepancy, however, is probably a secondary
effect of the change in extracellular and intracellular calcium ion concen-
tration on the conductance of the membrane to potassium ions. Recent
reports by Meech (1972) working with Aplysia neurones, by Isenberg
(1975) in cardiac Purkinje fibres and by Bassingthwaighte et al. (1976) in
ventricular myocardium demonstrate that membrane conductance to
potassium can be significantly and rapidly altered by an alteration in the
intracellular calcium ion concentration. Moreover, one of the effects of an
increase in the extracellular calcium ion concentration in addition to
increasing i5 will be to bring about an increase in the intracellular calcium
concentration via the Na-Ca exchange mechanism (Reuter & Seitz, 1968)
studied in various excitable tissues (for references see Blaustein, 1974).
Therefore in simulating the effects of an increase in extracellular calcium
ion concentration, one ought also to make a concomitant change in the
formulation for the potassium currents. An example of the attempt to
simulate such behaviour is seen in Fig. 13. Here, the effects of producing
e-fold changes in the extracellular calcium ion concentration are modelled
by three changes in the basic model parameters. Firstly, the reversal

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

205
potential computation for i8 is altered in order to recognize the change in
the Nernst relationship brought about by the increase or decrease in
extracellular calcium concentration, [Ca]o. Secondly, all potassium current
components in the model are altered by 15 % in the same direction as the
change in [Ca].. Thirdly, altering [Ca]o will change the external surface
charge of the membrane and will result in a shift along the voltage axis

+40

-40-

-s_

2

X

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~(Msec)

\ <--~Low [Ca]o

High [CaJ0---

Fig. 13. Simulation of the effects of an e-fold increase or decrease in the
extracellular calcium ion concentration; plotted along with standard recon-
struction (dotted line). See text for details of model alterations.

of all conductance parameters (Frankenhaeuser & Hodgkin, 1957; Weid-
mann, 1955b; Reuter & Scholz, 1976). In our model, an e-fold increase in
[Ca]o shifts all conductance parameters by 4 mV in the depolarizing
direction on the voltage axis. The resulting action potentials (Fig. 13)
demonstrate the characteristic change in action potential duration that is
seen with such an experimental intervention. Although is is indeed larger
and results in a higher plateau in the instance of increased [Ca]0, the
concomitant increase in potassium conductance brings about an earlier
re-polarization of the membrane potential. Moreover, the effect of i8 on
the plateau is accentuated by the shift in conductance parameters, and the
latter intervention alters the threshold of the rapid upstroke of the action
potential, increasing the threshold with increasing [Ca]0.

206

G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

An increase in iK1 due to accumulation of [Ca]i (Bassingthwaighte et al.
1976) and accumulation of [K]o (Cleemann & Morad, 1976) may also con-
tribute to the shortening of the action potential during rapid stimulation.
As was noted earlier, one of the greatest uncertainties in defining the
calcium conductance was the formulation of the intracellular handling
of calcium. The model adopted here proposes that the calcium current
flows into a limited volume within the cell, and then is sequestered from
this volume by some intracellular process, probably the sarcoplasmic

E= 74

+40

-40

-80

E

Es40

\

(msec)

A

Fig. 14. Effect on the simulated action potential of forcing constant reversal
potential E8 at 74 mY, and 40 mY, along with standard simulation, S. (See
text for discussion.)

reticulum (for further discussion of this see Bassingthwaighte & Reuter,
1972). One of the questions which we have sought to address with the
model is the effect upon the computed action potential of these assump-
tions. Alterations in the parameters which define this process have pre-
dictable effects. Thus, increasing the volume of distribution brings about a
lesser reduction in calcium reversal potential. The increased i5, which
results from the increased driving force, produces a higher plateau and
longer action potential. Similar changes result if the rate constant at
which calcium is removed from this volume is increased. Of greater
interest, however, is the effect of keeping Es constant. Fig. 14 shows two
such models along with the standard reconstruction. In the first, Es is

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

207
held fixed at 74 mV, the level reached during the plateau of normal recon-
struction. This version deviates from the standard tracing only during the
early plateau phase, where Es in the standard reconstruction is changing
most rapidly.

The second altered reconstruction has Es fixed at 40 mV (Reuter &
Scholz, 1976). In this reconstruction 98 and ix, are multiplied by 2-2 and
1-9 respectively, to arrive at approximately the same shape action poten-
tial. Again, there is little qualitative difference between this reconstruc-
tion and the standard version. Indeed, all of the phenomena discussed
earlier in the paper can be reproduced on any of these versions.

DISCUSSION

The main object of this paper has been the reconstruction of an action
potential of mammalian ventricular myocardium on the basis of ionic
currents measured in voltage-clamp experiments. Most of the detailed
properties of this model have been discussed in the Results. Hence it
remains to emphasize briefly some major features and shortcomings of our
reconstruction.

The membrane action potential model is based on two inward and two
outward current systems for which experimental evidence is available.
However, for the reconstruction of propagated action potentials it would be
desirable to have more detailed information about the kinetic properties
of the excitatory iNa' Unfortunately, none of the published voltage-clamp
methods applied to cardiac muscle are adequate to provide this informa-
tion. Here we see one of the major shortcomings of our model, since it
does not predict action potential behaviour during conduction or con-
duction disturbances, e.g. during arrhythmias.
The other ionic currents, al, iK, and ix,, are defined experimentally much
better than iNa. Therefore it is not surprising that features of the cardiac
action potential which depend on these current components are simulated
quite well by our reconstruction. Re-polarization of the action potential is
induced by the time-dependent decrease of the slow inward current, i8,
and by the increase of the time-dependent outward current, ix,. The rela-
tive contribution of both current components to re-polarization depends
'n the animal species and on the experimental conditions. In most in-
stances the decrease of is seems to be the dominant factor. However,
particularly during fast repetitive stimulation the build-up of ix, becomes
important for the shortening of the action potential duration.

The model simulates rather successfully 'all-or-nothing re-polarization'
as well as the prolongation of the action potential after depolarizing cur-
rent pulses during the plateau. These features are primarily dependent on

2. TV. BEELER AND H. REUTER

208
the kinetic properties of i8. The close agreement between experimental
results and computer reconstruction suggests that our model describes
these kinetics quite accurately.

A very intriguing phenomenon is the oscillatory behaviour of the mem-
brane potential during application of a constant outward current. Such
oscillations were first described by Reuter & Scholz (1968) in ventricular
trabeculae superfused with sodium-free solution. Our reconstruction model
simulates these oscillations and confirms its independence of iNa and its
dependence on i8 and i,,. Such pace-maker activity may be of importance
for generation of ectopic pace-makers in cardiac arrhythmias. It has also
been suggested that 'slow responses' which depend on i5 are important
for re-entrant arrhythmias (Cranefield, 1975).

A subject of major experimental uncertainty is whether and under
which conditions extracellular and intracellular accumulation, or deple-
tion, or both, of ions may occur. In our model we have incorporated only a
rapid and transient accumulation of intracellular calcium ions. However,
other changes in local ion concentrations may occur during normal or
pathologically altered action potentials. Thus, extracellular accumulation
of potassium ions has been observed under experimental conditions in
frog and mammalian ventricle (Cleemann & Morad, 1976; McGuigan,
1974). Such shifts in ion concentrations, if they occur in vivo in the whole
heart, may be responsible for local changes in the shape of the action
potential which, in turn, should be reflected by the electrocardiogram.

A more complete model of the cardiac action potential than ours will
also have to include current components generated by electrogenic pump
mechanisms. It will be interesting to see how the inclusion of such mecha-
nisms will alter the basic properties of our action potential model.

This work has been supported by grants HL 12824 and RR 00007 of the U.S.
National Institutes of Health and by grants 3.734.72 and 3.598.75 of the Swiss
National Science Foundation. This work was performed during the tenure of an
Established Investigatorship of the American Heart Association (G.W.B.).

REFERENCES

ANDERSON, D. U., KNoPP, T. J. & BASSINGTHWAIGHTE, J. B. (1970). SIMCON-

Simulation control to optimize man-machine interaction. Simulation 14, 81-86.

BASSINGTHWAIGHTE, J. B., FRY, C. H. & McGUIGAN, J. A. S. (1976). Relationship
between internal calcium and outward current in mammalian ventricular muscle;
a mechanism for the control of the action potential duration? J. Physiol. 262,
15-37.

BASSINGTHWAIGHTE, J. B. & REUTER, H. (1972). Calcium movements and excita-
tion contraction coupling in cardiac cells. In Electrical Phenomena in the Heart,
ed. DE MELLO, W. C., pp. 353-395. New York: Academic Press.

BEELER, G. W., JR & REUTER, H. (1970a). Voltage clamp experiments on ventri-

cular myocardium fibres. J. Physiol. 207, 165-190.

VENTRICULAR ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

209
BEELER, G. W., JR & REUTER, H. (1970b). Membrane calcium current in ventri-

cular myocardium fibres. J. Phy8iol. 207, 191-209.

BLAUSTEIN, M. P. (1974). The interrelationship between sodium and calcium fluxes

across cell membranes. Rev. Phy8iol. Biochem. Pharmac. 70, 34-82.

CLEEMANN, L. & MORAD, M. (1976). Extracellular potassium accumulation and
inward-going potassium rectification in voltage clamped ventricular muscle.
Science, N.Y. 191, 90-92.

CRANEFIELD, P. F. (1975). The Conduction of the Cardiac Impulse. Mount Kisco,

N.Y.: Futura.

DUDEL, J., PEPER, K., RUDEL, R. & TRAUTWEIN, W. (1967). The dynamic chloride
component of membrane current in Purkinje fibres. Pflugers Arch. ge8. Physiol.
295, 197-212.

FRANKENHAEUSER, B. & HODGKIN, A. L. (1957). The action of calcium on the

electrical properties of squid axons. J. Physiol. 137, 218-244.

FOZZARD, H. A. & HIRAoKA, M. (1973). The positive dynamic current and its in-

activation properties in cardiac Purkinje fibres. J. Physiol. 234, 569-586.

GETTES, L. S., MOREHOUSE, N. & SURAWICZ, B. (1972). Effect of premature de-
polarization on the duration of action potentials in Purkinje and ventricular
fibres of the moderator band of the pig heart. Role of proximity and the duration
of the preceding action potential. Circulation Res. 30, 55-66.

GETTES, L. S. & REUTER, H. (1974). Slow recovery from inactivation of inward

currents in mammalian myocardial fibres. J. Physiol. 240, 703-724.

GIEBISCH, G. & WEIDMANN, S. (1971). Membrane currents in mammalian ventri-
cular heart muscle fibres using a voltage-clamp technique. J. gen. Physiol. 57,
290-296.

GOLDMAN, L. (1975). Quantitative description of the sodium conductance of the
giant axon of Myxicola in terms of a generalized second order variable. Biophy8. J.
15, 119-136.

HAAS, H. G., KERN, R. EINWACHTER, H. M. & TARR, M. (1971). Kinetics of Na

inactivation in frog atria. Pfiiigers Arch. ge8. Physiol. 323, 141-157.

HODGKIN, A. L. & HUXLEY, A. F. (1952). A quantitative description of membrane
current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J. Physiol. 117,
500-544.

ISENBERG, G. (1975). Is potassium conductance of cardiac Purkinje fibrqs controlled

by [Ca2+]1? Nature, Lond. 253, 273-274.

KASS, R. S. & TsIEN, R. W. (1976). Control of action potential duration by calcium

ions in cardiac Purkinje fibres. J. gen. Physiol. 67, 599-617.

KATZUNG, B. G. (1975). Effects of extracellular calcium and sodium on depolariza-
tion-induced automaticity in guinea pig papillary muscle. Circulation Res. 37,
118-127.

KOHLHARDT, M., KRAUSE, J., KUBLER, M. & HERDEY, A. (1975). Kinetics of in-
activation and recovery of the slow inward current in the mammalian ventricular
myocardium. Pflugers Arch. ges. Physiol. 355, 1-17.

LANGE, G. E. (1960). Numerical Methods for High Speed Computers, pp. 54-57.

London: Iliffe.

McALLISTER, R. E., NOBLE, D. & TsIEN, R. W. (1975). Reconstruction of the

electrical activity of cardiac Purkinje fibres. J. Physiol. 251, 1-59.

McGUIGAN, J. A. S. (1974). Some limitations of the double sucrose gap and its use
in a study of the slow outward current in mammalian ventricular muscle.
J. Physiol. 240, 775- 806.

MEECH, R. W. (1972). Intracellular calcium injection causes increased potassium

conductance in Aplysia nerve cells. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 42A, 493-499.

".

210
NEW, W. & TRAUTWEIN, W. (1972). Inward membrane currents in mammalian

2G. W. BEELER AND H. REUTER

myocardium. Pflugers Arch. ges. Physiol. 334, 1-23.

NIEDERGERKE, R. & ORKAND, R. K. (1966). The dual effect of calcium on the

action potential of the frog's heart. J. Physiol. 184, 291-311.

NOBLE, D. (1975). The Initiation of the Heart Beat. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
NOBLE, D. & TsIEN, R. W. (1968). The kinetics and rectifier properties of the slow

potassium current in cardiac Purkinje fibres. J. Physiol. 195, 185-214.

NOBLE, D. & TSIEN, R. WV. (1969). Outward membrane currents activated in the

plateau range of potentials in cardiac Purkinje fibres. J. Physiol. 200, 205-232.

REUTER, H. (1968). Slow inactivation of currents in cardiac Purkinje fibres.

J. Physiol. 197, 233-253.

REUTER, H. (1973). Divalent cations as charge carriers in excitable membranes.

Prog. Biophys. molec. Biol. 26, 1-43.

REUTER, H. (1974). Localization of beta adrenergic receptors and effects of nor-
adrenaline and cyclic nucleotides on action potentials, ionic currents and tension
in mammalian cardiac muscle. J. Physiol. 242, 429-451.

REUTER, H. & BEELER, G. W., JR (1971). The mechanism of all-or-nothing re-
polarization in ventricular myocardial fibres. Proc. int. Union Physiol. Sci. 9, 472.
REUTER, H. & SCHOLZ, H. (1968). Uber den Einfluss der extracellularen Ca-
Konzentration auf Membranpotential und Kontraktion isolierter Herzpraparate
beigraduierter Depolarisation. Pflugers Arch. ges. Physiol. 300, 87-107.

REUTER, H. & SCHOLZ, H. (1976). A study of the ion selectivity and the kinetic
properties of the calcium-dependent slow inward current in mammalian cardiac
muscle. J. Physiol. 264, 17-47.

REUTER, H. & SEITZ, N. (1968). The dependence of calcium efflux from cardiac

muscle on temperature and external ion composition. J. Physiol. 195, 451-470.

TRAUTWEIN, WV. (1973). Membrane currents in cardiac muscle fibers. Physiol. Rev.

53, 793-835.

TRAUTWEIN, W., MCDONALD, T. F. & TRIPATHI, 0. (1975). Calcium conductance
and tension in mammalian ventricular muscle. Pflugers Arch. ges. Physiol. 354,
55-74.

VASSALLE, M. (1966). Analysis of cardiac pacemaker potential using a 'voltage-

clamp' technique. Am. J. Physiol. 210, 1335-1341.

VITEK, M. & TRAUTWEIN, W. (1971). Slow inward current and action potential in
cardiac Purkinje fibres. The effect of Mn++ ions. Pflugerm Arch. ges. Physiol. 323,
204-218.

WEIDMANN, S. (1951). Effect of current flow on the membrane potential of cardiac

muscle. J. Physiol. 115, 227-236.

WEI13MANN, S. (1955a). The effect of the cardiac membrane potential on the rapid

availability of the sodium carrying system. J. Physiol. 127,.213-224.

WEIDMANN, S. (1955b). Effects of calcium ions and local anaesthetics on electrical

properties of Purkinje fibres. J. Physiol. 129, 568-582.

WEIDMANN, S. (1970). Electrical constants of trabecular muscle from mammalian

heart. J. Physiol. 210, 1041-1054.

