Current Biology, Vol. 13, 1398–1408, August 19, 2003, 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/S0960-9822(03)00534-7

Autoinhibition with Transcriptional Delay:
A Simple Mechanism for the Zebrafish
Somitogenesis Oscillator

Julian Lewis*
Vertebrate Development Laboratory
Cancer Research UK London Research Institute
44 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WC2A 3PX
United Kingdom

Summary

Background: The pattern of somites is traced out by a
mechanism involving oscillating gene expression at the
tail end of the embryo. In zebrafish, two linked oscillating
genes, her1 and her7, coding for inhibitory gene regula-
tory proteins, are especially implicated in genesis of the
oscillations, while Notch signaling appears necessary
for synchronization of adjacent cells.
Results: I show by mathematical simulation that direct
autorepression of her1 and her7 by their own protein
products provides a mechanism for the intracellular os-
cillator. This mechanism operates robustly even when
one allows for the fact that gene regulation is an essen-
tially noisy (stochastic) process. The predicted period
is close to the observed period (30 min) and is dictated
primarily by the transcriptional delay, the time taken to
make an mRNA molecule. Through its coupling to her1/
her7 expression, Notch signaling can keep the rapid
oscillations in adjacent cells synchronized. When the
coupling parameters are varied, however, the model
system can switch to oscillations of a much longer pe-
riod, resembling that of the mouse or chick somitogen-
esis oscillator and governed by the delays in the Notch
pathway. Such Notch-mediated synchronous oscilla-
tions are predicted even in the absence of direct her1/
her7 autoregulation, through operation of the standard
Notch signaling pathway that is usually assumed simply
to give lateral inhibition.
Conclusions: Direct autorepression of a gene by its
own product can generate oscillations, with a period
determined by the transcriptional and translational de-
lays. Simple as they are, such systems show surprising
behaviors. To understand them, unaided intuition is not
enough: we need mathematics.

Introduction

Somites, the future segments of the vertebrate body
axis, are laid down in head-to-tail succession. The so-
mite rudiments are marked out in alternating bands of
expression of genes that distinguish anterior from poste-
rior portions of somites. This pattern, like the trace on
a magnetic recording tape, represents the record of a
temporal oscillation, manifest in cyclic changes in levels
of gene expression in the cells of the presomitic meso-

*Correspondence: julian.lewis@cancer.org.uk

derm, or PSM, from which the somites derive (Figure 1)
[1, 2]. As growth continues at the tail end of the embryo,
cells exit from the anterior end of the PSM and cease
oscillating, probably because of a decline in the concen-
tration of Fgf8 when the distance from the tail bud be-
comes large [3]. According to the phase of the oscillation
cycle in which they become arrested, the cells leaving
the PSM switch on sustained expression of different
sets of genes, marking them as front end or back end
of a nascent somite.

The oscillation in the PSM is called the somite clock,
and the moving interface between the PSM and the
determined somite tissue is called the somitogenesis
wavefront; somite patterning is thus said to depend on
a clock and wavefront mechanism [4]. A single complete
somite rudiment consists of the set of cells that emerge
from the PSM in the course of one complete clock cycle,
that is, in one complete cycle of the posterior PSM oscil-
lation. What then is the mechanism that drives this oscil-
lation and defines its timing; in other words, how does
the clock work?

The Oscillator Depends on Components
of the Notch Signaling Pathway
In the zebrafish, the only genes so far reported to cycle
in the posterior PSM code for components of the Notch
signaling pathway or for downstream genes whose ex-
pression is regulated by Notch signaling. Thus, deltaC,
coding for a Notch ligand, oscillates, and so do her1
and her7, coding for inhibitory bHLH gene regulatory
proteins of the Hairy/E(spl) family that are controlled by
Notch [5–8]. The mRNA levels of these genes go up and
down synchronously in the posterior PSM with a period
of 30 min (at 28⬚C), corresponding to the time taken to
generate one additional somite.

The set of genes known to be required for normal
oscillations in the posterior PSM is somewhat larger,
but, again, all or almost all of them lie in the Notch
pathway [5–11]. All this suggests that the oscillator, in
zebrafish at least, is somehow based on Notch pathway
components.

In the Zebrafish, PSM Cells May Continue
to Oscillate Even When out of Synchrony
with Their Neighbors
A gene whose expression oscillates may be merely a
downstream read-out of the core oscillator, like the
hands on a mechanical clock. Moreover, a gene required
for oscillation may merely code for necessary supporting
apparatus, like the clock frame, cogs, and bearings. The
problem is to identify the genes whose products actually
generate the oscillations.

In mutants in which Notch signaling is disrupted, the
pattern of deltaC expression, although abnormal, does
not correspond to what one might expect for a nonfunc-
tional oscillator. The cells in the PSM, instead of all
adopting a maximal, minimal, or at least uniform level
of expression of deltaC, show a pepper-and-salt mixture

The Zebrafish Somitogenesis Oscillator
1399

Figure 1. A Zebrafish Embryo at the 10-Somite Stage, Stained by In Situ Hybridization for deltaC mRNA, Coding for the Notch Ligand DeltaC
The expression pattern of this gene is like that of her1 and her7: oscillation occurs in the PSM and is arrested as cells become recruited into
the region of formed somites. The arrest is not abrupt, but it is foreshadowed by a gradual slowing of the oscillation in the transition region
(the anterior PSM). This gives rise to a graded phase lag, such that cells in different parts of the PSM at any given instant are in different
phases of their oscillation cycle. The maximal rate of oscillation occurs at the tail end of the PSM, and this defines the periodicity of the whole
process: in the course of one oscillation cycle of the posterior PSM, the entire spatiotemporal pattern of gene expression in the PSM goes
through a complete cycle of changes and returns to its initial configuration, but with an increase of one in the number of formed somites ([1],
Appendix). The nth somite consists of cells arrested after the nth cycle since somitogenesis began. (Photograph courtesy of Yun-Jin Jiang.)

of different levels of expression: the appearance is what
one would expect if the cells were individually continuing
to oscillate almost normally but had lost synchrony [5].
This suggests that some intracellular mechanism gener-
ates oscillations in each cell, and that the function of
cell-cell communication via the Notch pathway is to
synchronize neighbors so that they oscillate in phase
with one another.

If there is such an intracellular oscillator mechanism,
how might it work? Oscillations in biological systems
are typically generated by negative feedback loops [12].
As explained in Figure 2, the length of the delay in the
feedback loop dictates the period of the oscillation. One
might therefore hope to find at the heart of the oscillator
some molecule that, with a delay, directly or indirectly
inhibits its own production or activation. The feedback
loop should be intracellular, so that oscillation can occur
even without any coordinated periodic prompting from
neighboring cells, as it seems to do in Notch pathway
mutants in which the neighbors are in a random assort-
ment of different phases. On the other hand, the oscilla-
tors in neighboring cells must normally be capable to
some extent of influencing one another via the Notch
pathway, so that when the pathway functions, syn-
chrony is preserved. Thus, the central oscillating com-
ponent should be sensitive to signals from neighbors,
delivered via the Notch pathway, so as to bring its own
oscillation into step with theirs; and it should itself drive
an oscillation of the signals for activation of Notch—for
example, oscillation of expression of the Notch ligand
Delta—so that the cell can reciprocally tell its neighbors
what phase of the oscillation cycle it is itself in.

Cell-Autonomous Oscillations in the Zebrafish
May Be Generated by her1 and/or her7
Recent papers have identified her1 and her7 as a pair
of genes in the zebrafish that jointly satisfy all these
conditions to be central components of the oscillator.
Both genes code for bHLH gene regulatory proteins in
the E(spl)-related subfamily of the hairy/E(spl) inhibitory
class [13]; they lie only 11 kb apart in the genome, with
opposite polarity and possibly sharing common regula-

tory elements [14, 15]. Their levels of expression, as
indicated by their mRNA concentrations, normally oscil-
late in synchrony in the PSM, with a periodicity and
phase matching those of deltaC, as though the mRNA
levels of all three genes are coordinately regulated [8].
When both her1 and her7 are lost through a chromo-
somal deletion [9], or when both gene products are
knocked down by morpholino injections, oscillation
breaks down: deltaC expression in the PSM fails to oscil-
late, the spatially periodic pattern of expression of
marker genes in the maturing somite tissue is lost, and
the physical pattern of somite segmentation becomes
grossly irregular. Morpholino knockdown of her1 by it-
self or her7 by itself produces similar but weaker effects
[6, 8, 9]. Both genes are positively regulated by Notch
signaling [8, 10], and, most importantly, they appear
to negatively regulate their own expression [6, 8]. The
evidence for this negative autoregulation in the zebrafish
comes mainly from studies of her1 and her7 mRNA ex-
pression in the her1 or her7 morpholino knockdown
experiments. Although there is some debate about these
experiments and there may be differences between her1
and her7 in the way they function in the anterior and
posterior parts of the PSM [8, 15], the evidence for the
corresponding gene in the mouse is clear cut. Like her1
and her7, the mouse Hes7 gene, the ortholog of her1,
shows oscillating expression in the PSM and is neces-
sary for regular somite segmentation; and studies with
a lacZ knockin mutation, as well as protein stabilization
experiments, show clearly that Hes7 protein inhibits
Hes7 expression [16, 17]. As Holley et al. [6], Hirata et al.
[18], and Bessho et al. [17] have emphasized, negative
feedback regulation of this sort provides the basis for
an oscillator.

Direct Autoinhibition of Gene Expression
Can Generate Oscillations
The simplest possibility one might envisage would be
a feedback loop in which Her1 or Her7 protein directly
binds to the regulatory DNA of its own gene to inhibit
transcription. Indeed, direct binding of Hes7 protein to
the Hes7 promoter has been demonstrated in the mouse

Current Biology
1400

Idealized Oscillators Illustrating Basic Principles: The Pe-

Figure 2.
riod Is Determined by the Delay in the Feedback Loop
(A) On/off switch. Transition to the “on” state creates a delayed
negative feedback signal, causing transition to the “off” state after
time T, and vice versa; the time for one complete cycle (on →
off → on) is 2T.
(B) System described by a continuous variable, x(t ), autoregulated
by negative feedback with delay T such that x(t ) ⫽ f(x[t ⫺ T]), where

[17]. But could such a simple system really generate
oscillations? To answer, one has to do some mathemat-
ics. For the given autoregulatory gene, let m be the
number of mRNA molecules in the cell at any instant, and
let p be the number of molecules of the corresponding
protein. The rate of change of m and p might then be
supposed to obey the equations:

dp
dt

dm
dt

⫽ am ⫺ bp

,

⫽ f(p) ⫺ cm

(1)

where the constants b and c are the decay rates (inverse
lifetimes) of the protein and message molecules, a is
the rate of production of new protein molecules per
mRNA molecule, and f(p ) is the rate of production of new
mRNA molecules, which is assumed to be a decreasing
function of the amount of protein p. For example, we
might take f(p ) ⫽ k/(1 ⫹ p2/p0
2), with k and p0 as con-
stants, to represent the action of an inhibitory protein
that acts as a dimer (as bHLH proteins do).

It can be proved from Bendixson’s Negative Criterion,
however, that it is impossible for this pair of differential
equations to generate sustained oscillations ([19], p.
109). This conclusion holds good for any form of the
function f(p ), provided only that a and c are both positive
numbers. Other investigators of gene expression oscilla-
tions have therefore postulated more complex mecha-
nisms, involving larger numbers of components (e.g.,
[18]), and have even created artificial bacterial systems
in which oscillations are generated by, for example, a
ring of three genes, the protein product of each one
regulating the transcription of the next [20].

There is, however, a much simpler way to arrive at
sustained oscillations, by taking more careful account
of the delays involved in the synthesis of mRNA and
protein (Figure 3A). The amount of regulatory protein p
in the cell dictates the rate of initiation of transcription,
but a significant time, Tm, elapses between the initiation
of transcription and the arrival of the mature mRNA mol-
ecule in the cytoplasm. Thus, the rate of increase in
the number of mature mRNA molecules at any instant
reflects the value of p at a time that is earlier by an
amount Tm. Likewise, there is a delay, Tp, between the
initiation of translation and the emergence of a complete

f is a monotonically decreasing function. If, for example, f(x ) ⫽ K/(1 ⫹
x2), oscillations will be sustained and will have period 2T whenever
K ⬎ 2. (This is the condition under which the pair of equations x1 ⫽
f[x2] and x2 ⫽ f[x1] has solutions x1 ⬆ x2; the system then alternates
between state x ⫽ x1 and state x ⫽ x2).
(C) A chemical system in which the rate of synthesis of a substance
x is regulated by delayed negative feedback and degradation occurs
at rate cx(t ): dx(t )/dt ⫽ f(x[t ⫺ T]) ⫺ cx(t ). If degradation is rapid in
relation to the delay time T, so that c ⬎⬎ 1/T, the concentration
closely follows the instantaneous value of f(x[t ⫺ T])/c and the behav-
ior approximates that of system (B). Thus, if f(x ) ⫽ K/(1 ⫹ x2), the
system oscillates with a period of ⵑ2T provided K/c ⲏ 2. If degrada-
tion is too slow (specifically, if c ⬍ r/T, where r ⫽ 2␲/3公3 ⵑ1.2),
sustained oscillation becomes impossible even for very large values
of K/c (see [12], pg. 192). For further discussion, see also [48] and
references therein.

The Zebrafish Somitogenesis Oscillator
1401

functional protein molecule. The equations 1 are easily
modified to take account of these delays:

dp(t)
dt

dm(t)

dt

⫽ am(t ⫺ Tp) ⫺ bp(t)

,

⫽ f(p(t ⫺Tm)) ⫺ cm(t)

(2A)

where the time dependencies of the variables are now
shown explicitly.

Delay differential equations such as these cannot be
solved analytically, but they are easily solved numeri-
cally for any given choice of parameters. Oscillations
occur easily and robustly provided certain simple condi-
tions are satisfied. In the discussion below, it will be
assumed that

f( p) ⫽

k

1 ⫹ p2/p0

2 ,

(2B)

which represents the action of the inhibitory protein as
a dimer; however, the behavior is qualitatively similar
n) for n ⬎ 1.
for other cases, such as f(p ) ⫽ k/(1 ⫹ pn/p0

The Period of Oscillation Is Determined
by the Sum of the Transcriptional
and Translational Delays
The behavior is easiest to analyze in the limit in which
the lifetimes of the mRNA and protein are very short
compared with the total delay time T ⫽ Tm ⫹ Tp. Oscilla-

(B) Molecular control circuitry for a pair of coregulated genes, her1
and her7, whose protein products combine as a heterodimer to
inhibit her1 and her7 expression.
(C–E) Computed behavior of system (A), showing the number of
her1 mRNA molecules per cell in red and of Her1 protein molecules
in blue. Drastic changes in the rate constant for protein (or mRNA)
synthesis (such as might be produced by partially blocking transla-
tion with cycloheximide) cause little or no change in the period of
oscillation, though beyond a certain critical severity they may con-
vert the sustained oscillation into a damped oscillation. The results
are computed for parameter values appropriate to a her1 homodimer
oscillator (as specified in the text) and show outcomes for three
different values of a, the number of protein molecules synthesized
per mRNA molecule per minute. Results are similar for a her7 homo-
dimer oscillator and for the her1/her7 heterodimer oscillator shown
in (B). The protein and the mRNA are assumed absent initially, with
the gene becoming abruptly available for transcription at time 0.
Thereafter, the amounts of protein and mRNA are assumed to
change according to the equations 2 in the text. In general, for
sustained oscillations, three conditions must be satisfied: (i) ak/bc ⬎
2 p0; (ii) b ⲏ 1.7/T; and (iii) c ⲏ 1.7/T, where T ⫽ Tm ⫹ Tp. The period
of oscillation is then given to a good approximation (within ⵑ15%)
by the formula 2(T ⫹ 1/b ⫹ 1/c ).
(F–H) Computed behavior of system (A) when the stochastic nature
of the control of gene expression is taken into account. Results are
shown for the case in which the repressor protein dissociates from
its binding site on the DNA with a rate constant koff ⫽ 1 min⫺1,
corresponding to a mean lifetime of 1 min for the repressor bound
state. Other parameters are set to be the same as in (C)–(E). Note
that oscillation now continues with high amplitude, though noisily,
even under conditions in which the deterministic model predicts
that oscillation will be damped (compare [H] with [E]). With lower
values of koff, corresponding to longer lifetime for the repressor
bound state, this phenomenon is even more pronounced.
For details of the computation and proofs of the analytical results,
see the Supplemental Data.

Figure 3. A Cell-Autonomous Gene Expression Oscillator: Effects
of Partial Blockade of Translation and Effects of Noise
(A) Molecular control circuitry for a single gene, her1, whose protein
product acts as a homodimer to inhibit her1 expression.

Current Biology
1402

tions, in this extreme, take the form of square waves:
the system flip-flops between two quasisteady states,
and the period of oscillation is simply 2T, in accordance
with the basic principles illustrated for a still simpler
system in Figure 2. There is just one additional condition
that must be satisfied for oscillation to occur: the maxi-
mal rates of mRNA and protein synthesis must be high
enough to be capable of raising the protein concentra-
tion beyond the critical value, p0, at which the inhibition
of mRNA synthesis starts to operate in earnest. Specifi-
cally, we require ak/bc ⬎ 2p0.

As the lifetimes of the protein and mRNA become
longer, so that they are no longer negligible in compari-
son with the total delay T, the square-wave form of the
oscillations becomes smoothened into something more
like a sine wave (see Figures 2C and 3A). Sustained
oscillations will still occur provided that the lifetimes are
not too long and the product of the rate constants for
mRNA and protein synthesis is high enough. The period
of the oscillations ranges between a minimum of 2T
(when the lifetimes are very short) and a maximum of
approximately 4T (as the lifetimes approach their upper
limit). In fact, one can show analytically that for 1/b ⬍⬍
T and 1/c ⬍⬍ T, the period is approximately equal to 2
(T ⫹ 1/b ⫹ 1/c ) (see the Supplemental Data available
online). Thus, the delay T is the key determinant of the
period. The values of the other parameters can be varied
by orders of magnitude, with very little effect on the
period, provided only that the conditions for sustained
oscillation are satisfied (Figures 3C–3E).

The Predicted Period for a her1/her7 Oscillator Is
Close to the Observed Period of the Somite Oscillator
To see whether her1 and/or her7 could generate oscilla-
tions by the simple mechanism mentioned above, we
have to estimate the parameters a, b, c, k, p0, Tm, and
Tp. The observed period of the somite oscillator is short,
and it is therefore reasonable to assume that the rates
a, b, c, and k are close to the upper limits reported for
mRNA and proteins in eukaryotic cells. Plausible values
are: a ⫽ 4.5 protein molecules per mRNA molecule per
minute [21]; b ⫽ c ⫽ 0.23 molecules per minute, corre-
sponding to protein and mRNA half-lives of 3 min [22,
23]; k ⫽ 33 mRNA molecules per diploid cell per minute,
corresponding to 1000 transcripts per hour per gene
copy in the absence of inhibition [21]; p0 ⫽ 40 molecules,
corresponding to a critical concentration of ⵑ10⫺9 M
within a 5 ␮m-diameter cell nucleus.

To estimate the delays Tm and Tp, note that for animal
cells, RNA polymerase II moves along DNA at a rate of
roughly 20 nucleotides per second [21, 24, 25]. Though
data are scanty, it has been estimated from a study
of two different genes in mammalian cells that each
successive intron takes between 0.4 and 7.5 min (half-
life) to splice out [26]. A further delay, estimated at about
4 min (half-life), elapses after completion of splicing be-
fore the mature mRNA emerges into the cytosol [26].
The mRNA is translated by ribosomes moving at roughly
6 nucleotides per second [21]. Given the genomic se-
quence of her1 and her7 (GenBank accession number
AF292032), and assuming similar rates for fish and mam-
mal, we arrive at the following estimates: for her1, which

has a primary transcript of length 6005 nt, with 3 introns,
and codes for a protein of 328 amino acids, we have
10.2 ⬍ Tmher1 ⬍ 31.5 min and Tpher1 ≈ 2.8 min; for her7,
which has a primary transcript of length 1280 nt, with 2
introns, and codes for a protein of 204 amino acids, we
have 5.9 ⬍ Tmher7 ⬍ 20.1 min and Tpher7 ≈ 1.7 min. Thus,
the estimated total delay T for her1 is between 13.0 and
34.3 min, and, for her7, it is between 7.6 and 21.8 min.
By inserting parameter values anywhere within these
ranges in the equations 2 we obtain oscillations. More-
over, it is easy to extend equations 2 to describe the
case in which her1 and her7 are coordinately regulated
by a heterodimer of Her1 protein with Her7 protein;
again, the system oscillates. If we assume that it takes
1 min to splice out each intron for her1 and her7, so
that Tmher1 ≈ 12 min and Tmher7 ≈ 7.1 min, we get a computed
period of 47 min for the pure Her1 dimer oscillator, 30
min for the pure Her7 dimer oscillator, and 37 min for
the Her1/Her7 heterodimer oscillator. Given the uncer-
tainties in the parameter values, the periods predicted
for all these variant mechanisms represent good agree-
ment with the observed period of 30 min for the zebrafish
somite oscillator at 28⬚C. The her1/her7 heterodimer
oscillator model has the virtue that it accounts for the
observed joint involvement of her1 and her7 in a simple
and plausible way; its behavior is generally similar to
that of a simple homodimer oscillator based on her1 or
her7 alone.

The Oscillator Is Surprisingly Insensitive
to Blockade of Protein Synthesis
The properties of an oscillator of the type described
can be quite surprising. What, for example, will be the
consequence of a drastic general reduction of protein
synthesis? One might expect that this would stop the
oscillator, which depends on protein synthesis, or at
least that it would cause a big change in the period and
amplitude. In fact, if we reduce the protein synthesis
rate constant a to one tenth of its standard value (from
4.5 to 0.45 protein molecules per minute per ribosome)
and use the model to recompute the predicted mRNA
levels (taking the her1 homodimer oscillator as an exam-
ple), we find none of these effects. Sustained oscillation
is still seen, the period is practically unchanged, and
even the amplitude of the mRNA oscillation is almost
the same as before (Figure 3D). A further reduction, to
a twentieth of the standard value, does indeed cause a
qualitative change in the behavior: oscillations now are
damped, so that the system tends toward a nonoscillat-
ing steady state (Figure 3E). But the period of the
damped oscillations is practically the same as before,
and the damping (for a ⫽ 0.225) is only about 25% per
cycle, so that, for example, it takes 4 cycles for the
amplitude to fall to one third of its initial value if the
system is initially far from its steady state.

Palmeirim et al. [1] have tested experimentally the
effects of inhibiting protein synthesis with cyclohexi-
mide during chick somite formation: an 84% reduction
in protein synthesis, maintained for the duration of a
full cycle of the normal oscillator, allows oscillation of
c-hairy1 mRNA levels to continue. This finding was origi-
nally taken to imply that the oscillation could not depend

The Zebrafish Somitogenesis Oscillator
1403

on oscillating synthesis of a regulatory protein. From
the mathematical model, we can see that (regardless of
the details of the chick somitogenesis oscillator) this is
not a safe inference. Indeed, subsequent work in chick
and mouse has strongly suggested that the oscillation
is after all based on oscillating synthesis of mRNA and
protein [27–30].

Figure 3E also illustrates another counterintuitive fea-
ture. If Her1/Her7 protein represses transcription of the
her1/her7 gene(s), one might expect that when transla-
tion of her1 or her7 mRNA is blocked with an antisense
morpholino, as in the experiments mentioned earlier,
repression would be lost and levels of the mRNA would
rise dramatically. In fact, as the figure shows, the nega-
tive feedback operates in such a way that even with a
95% block of translation, the mRNA in our model system
tends only to a middling value, intermediate between
the extremes of the normal oscillation. To get the mRNA
concentration to rise above the levels normally encoun-
tered, the morpholino block must be even more severe.
It can be difficult, therefore, to draw conclusions from
morpholino experiments as to the presence or absence
of negative feedback.

Damped Oscillations or Progressive Loss of
Synchrony May Explain the Normality of the
First Few Somites in Somitogenesis Mutants
As we have just seen, when the parameters of the model
system are altered to such a degree that sustained oscil-
lation becomes impossible, damped oscillations can still
occur. These may have a large amplitude if the system
is started far from the steady state, and their decay
may be slow. Moreover, the period of these damped
oscillations is almost the same as the period of the
sustained oscillations that occur for other parameter
values, provided only that the delay T in the feedback
loop is unchanged.

This suggests a simple interpretation of a curious ob-
servation: in most of the mutants listed earlier that show
a disrupted pattern of somite segmentation, as well as in
analogous mouse mutants, the first few somites appear
practically unaffected. The mathematical model shows
that there is no need to invoke any region-specific mo-
lecular control machinery to explain this phenomenon:
the normal formation of the first few somites can simply
reflect the occurrence of a damped oscillation at the
onset of somitogenesis, followed by a failure of pat-
terning as the amplitude of oscillation declines to zero.
This explanation is attractive in principle, but experi-
mental observations indicate that it is not quite right
in fact, for the zebrafish at least. In the mutants and
morpholino-injected embryos in which somitogenesis is
progressively disrupted, the oscillations of the individual
cells in the PSM do not all damp down to a common
steady level. Instead, as noted earlier, the cells drift into
a pepper-and-salt pattern of gene expression [5, 8], in
a manner suggesting that they are still oscillating individ-
ually but have lost coordination and become random-
ized with respect to their phase in the oscillation cycle.
On this basis, we proposed in a previous paper that the
first few somites form normally, and the subsequent
somites abnormally, not because of damped oscillations

in the individual cells, but because individual cell oscilla-
tors, having been set going in synchrony, take time to
drift out of synchrony [5].

The two explanations, damping of individual cell oscil-
lations and damping of the population average oscilla-
tion through loss of synchrony, seem quite different, but
they are not mutually exclusive. In fact, a closer analysis
of the principles of the feedback inhibition oscillator
shows that the same type of genetic defect can give
rise to either or both of these phenomena, according to
the parameter values of the system. To see how this
can be, and to explain why so many types of genetic
disturbance that disrupt somite segmentation in the ze-
brafish give the pepper-and-salt result, we must take
account of one further essential feature of real cells:
noise in the control of gene expression.

Noisy Control of Gene Expression Favors
Continued Oscillation
In any transcriptional control system, random fluctua-
tions will arise from random variation, or noise, in the
regulation of gene expression [31]. The binding and dis-
sociation of a gene regulatory protein to and from its
site on DNA are stochastic processes, each described
by a certain probability of occurrence per unit time, so
that we should expect her1 and her7 to flicker between
“off” (repressor bound) and “on” (repressor dissociated)
states. In writing down our deterministic equations that
describe the gene regulation in terms of a smooth de-
pendence of transcription rate on protein concentration,
we are in effect assuming that we can replace the under-
lying on/off flickering behavior by an instantaneous time
average, in which the rate of transcription is proportional
to the fraction of time the gene is currently spending
with repressor protein bound to it. The slower the aver-
age flicker rate, the more the real system will depart
from the idealized deterministic behavior.

Figures 3F–3H show how the predictions of the deter-
ministic model for a single cell are altered when we take
into account the noisy nature of gene regulation. As
explained in detail in the Supplemental Data, to model
the stochastic effects, we have to specify just one further
independent parameter in addition to those characteriz-
ing the deterministic model: the rate constant koff for
dissociation of the repressor protein from its binding
site in the regulatory DNA. The results in Figures 3F–3H
represent the case where koff ⫽ 1 min⫺1, corresponding
to a mean lifetime of 1 min for the repressor bound state.
Three main points are apparent:

First, when protein synthesis is at the full normal rate
(Figure 3F), the noisy system oscillates in the same way
as the deterministic system; the only obvious difference
consists in some random variability in the amplitude and
shape of individual oscillation peaks. The smaller the
value we assign to koff, the larger these noise effects
become (data not shown). But even for a koff as small
as 0.1 min⫺1, corresponding to a mean lifetime of 10
min for the repressor bound state, well-defined (though
noisy) oscillations still occur and have practically the
same mean period as in the deterministic model, re-
flecting the length of the delays in the feedback loop.
Second, when protein synthesis is attenuated (Figure

Current Biology
1404

3G), the noisy system still oscillates with the same mean
period as the deterministic system, but with more ran-
dom variation in the amplitude and shape of the individ-
ual peaks and in the spacing between them.

Third, when protein synthesis is attenuated severely
(Figure 3H), to the point where the deterministic system
shows only damped oscillation, the noisy system does
not tend to a steady state, but shows persistent strong
fluctuations in the level of mRNA. A large random fluctu-
ation can initiate a damped train of oscillations; although
these are noisy, they still show the standard periodicity.
Thus, oscillation continues but is episodic, with periods
of regularity and high amplitude separated by intervals
of more random fluctuation. In fact, when koff is made
smaller, intensifying stochastic effects, the behavior ap-
proximates still more closely to sustained oscillation.
Far from disrupting oscillation, noise helps it to occur.
Conversely, the larger we make koff, the smaller the
stochastic effects become, until for koff ⲏ 10 min⫺1, the
behavior approximates that of the deterministic system.
Thus, according to the dissociation rate of the repressor
protein from its DNA binding site, the same mutation
may lead to oscillations that are simply damped, or to
oscillations that continue with substantial amplitude but
reduced regularity.

Zebrafish with mutations in the Notch pathway [5] or
injected with anti-her1 or anti-her7 morpholinos ([8], and
B. Aerne, personal communication) presumably corre-
spond to the latter case, with oscillation continuing nois-
ily. In these embryos, it is not surprising that synchrony
between neighbors is lost: there is not only a defect in
the production of proteins needed for cell-cell communi-
cation, but also an increased tendency for the cells to
be erratic in their individual rhythms.

Delta-Notch Communication Can Synchronize
her1/her7 Oscillations in Adjacent Cells
If the clock-and-wavefront mechanism is to guide regu-
lar somite segmentation, neighboring PSM cells must
oscillate in synchrony. It is easy to extend the basic
single-cell oscillator model to show how, through Notch
signaling mechanisms that are known to operate in the
PSM, synchronization can be achieved (Figure 4).

For simplicity, let us disregard stochastic effects and
consider two adjacent PSM cells with slightly different
free-running oscillation periods, so that in the absence
of cell-cell communication their cycles will drift in and
out of synchrony (Figure 4B). To model the effect of
Notch-mediated communication, note first of all that in
the normal zebrafish, levels of mRNA coding for the
Notch ligand DeltaC oscillate very nearly in phase with
the oscillations of her1 and her7 mRNA ([8]; L. Smithers
and J.L., unpublished data). It is reasonable to hypothe-
size, therefore, that deltaC expression is regulated in
parallel with expression of her1 and her7 by Her1/Her7
protein acting directly on the deltaC promoter, and that
the mRNA and protein lifetimes are short for deltaC, as
they are for her1 and her7, so that DeltaC protein levels
will oscillate. (The effective DeltaC protein lifetime is
expected to be short, since Delta proteins delivered to
the cell surface are rapidly endocytosed and degraded
[32]). DeltaC oscillation will cause oscillation in the level

Figure 4. Notch Signaling Can Synchronize Oscillations in Two Ad-
jacent Cells
(A) The molecular circuitry: the two cells are assumed to contain
her1/her7 heterodimer oscillators, but with a 10% difference in their
values of Tm ⫹ Tp, corresponding to different free-running oscillation
periods. The oscillators are coupled via Notch signaling.
(B) The computed behavior with no Notch-mediated cell-cell com-
munication. The cells drift in and out of synchrony.
(C) Notch signaling active, with a signaling delay of TN ⫽ 36 min.
The rate of her1/her7 transcription is assumed to be determined by
the product of an increasing function of the amount of Delta-Notch
activity and a decreasing function of the amount of Her1/Her7 pro-
tein dimers. The cells oscillate synchronously, with a period that is
an average of their free-running periods.
(D) Notch signaling active, but with a delay of TN ⫽ 56 min. The cells
now oscillate asynchronously.
See the Supplemental Data for full details.

of Notch activation in each cell according to the level
of DeltaC in its neighbor. Activation of Notch stimulates
expression of her1 and her7 [8, 10]. We may thus sup-
pose that the transcription of her1 and her7 is governed
by the product of two oscillatory influences: positive
regulation by activated Notch and inhibition by Her1/
Her7. Figure 4A shows the proposed control scheme;
while it is speculative in some respects, and has diffi-
culty explaining some of the results of mRNA injection
experiments [10], it seems the simplest way to represent
the main experimental facts. Full details of the corre-
sponding system of equations for the two interacting
cells are given as Supplemental Data, together with the
Mathematica program used to compute the behavior.

The Zebrafish Somitogenesis Oscillator
1405

Just as single-cell oscillation depends on the delay
in the her1/her7 intracellular feedback loop, so synchro-
nization of two cells depends on the delays in the cell-
cell signaling pathway. The total delay in the Notch path-
way, TN, is a sum of four parts: the delay TmdeltaC from
initiation of transcription of deltaC (the event controlled
by Her1/Her7) to emergence of a mature deltaC mRNA
molecule into the cytoplasm; the delay TpdeltaC from initia-
tion to completion of synthesis of a DeltaC protein mole-
cule; the delay Tpexport for delivery of the protein via the
secretory pathway to the cell surface; and the delay
TNotchActivation from the time when functional DeltaC protein
reaches the cell surface to the time when the resultant
activated Notch arrives in the nucleus of the neighboring
cell to regulate transcription of her1 and her7. TmdeltaC
and TpdeltaC can be estimated in the same way as the
corresponding delays for her1 and her7, by using the
published sequence data (GenBank gi|18858544 and
gi|27374724): deltaC has a primary transcript of ⵑ4851
nt, with 8 introns, coding for a protein of 664 aa, giving
estimates 16 min ⬍ TmdeltaC ⬍ 68 min and TpdeltaC ≈ 5.5 min.
Transit times, Tpexport, in the protein export pathway in
vertebrate cells are highly variable, but they may be as
short as 15 min [33–35]. Data on TNotchActivation are scanty,
but it is likely to be short by comparison with Tpexport [36].
Adding these contributions, we conclude that the total
delay, TN, in the Notch signaling pathway could be any-
where from about 36 min up to a few hours. Given the
rapidity of other events in the PSM cells, it is reasonable
to assume the shorter value.

One might think that such a long delay in the cell-
to-cell signaling pathway would make it incapable of
synchronizing the rapid oscillations of the individual
cells. But again, intuition is a poor guide to the behavior
of the system. Numerical modeling with the specified
parameters shows that the two adjacent cells are in fact
forced into synchrony (Figure 4C). The mechanism is
robust: the same effect is obtained if we make TN longer
or shorter by up to 10 min, although not if we make it
20 min longer (Figure 4D) or 15 min shorter. (The “push”
that the one cell delivers to its neighbor must be received
in the correct part of the neighbor’s own oscillation cycle
if it is to promote synchronized oscillation.) Moreover,
the precise value of TN has very little effect on the period
of oscillation, which is chiefly defined by the her1/her7
kinetics.

A Small Change in Gene Regulation Can Switch
Control of the Oscillator Period from the
Intracellular to the Intercellular Feedback Loop
In the circuitry just described for two interacting cells
(see Figure 4A), the intercellular signaling pathway via
Notch creates an additional feedback loop (activated
Notch in cell #1 → her1/her7 in cell #1 —| deltaC in cell
#1 → activated Notch in cell #2 → her1/her7 in cell #2 —|
deltaC in cell #2 → activated Notch in cell #1, where →
denotes stimulation and —| denotes inhibition). This
control circuit is capable of generating oscillations in its
own right (Figure 5). This is easily verified by eliminating
direct her1/her7 autoinhibition in the model of two inter-
acting cells, leaving her1 and her7 regulated directly by
Delta-Notch activity alone, and recomputing the behav-

Figure 5. A Small Change in Parameters Can Cause an Abrupt
Switch in the Period and Mechanism of Coupled Oscillation
The graphs show the behavior of the same two-cell system as in
Figure 4, assuming TN ⫽ 36 min, but varying the quantitative details
of the regulation of her1/her7 expression by Notch.
(A) A diagram of the regulation of her1/her7 transcription: the rate
of transcription in each cell is assumed to be the sum of two contri-
butions, dependent on separate enhancers in the regulatory DNA.
One enhancer (“combinatorial”) mediates a combined action of acti-
vated Notch and Her1/Her7 protein; its contribution is described by
a function that represents stimulation by Notch, multiplied by a
function that represents inhibition of that effect by Her1/Her7. The
other enhancer (“pure Notch”) mediates a simple stimulatory effect
of activated Notch, independent of Her1/Her7.
(B–E) Computed behavior, for different values of the percentage
contribution to transcription due to the “pure Notch” enhancer. The
cells oscillate synchronously, but as the “pure Notch” contribution
rises above about 10%, they switch abruptly to a much longer cycle
time, dictated by the delay Tp ⫹ Tm ⫹ TN in the her1/her7 → Notch →
her1/her7 feedback loop, instead of the delay Tp ⫹ Tm in the direct
intracellular her1/her7 → her1/her7 loop.
(F) Computed behavior for the same case as shown in (E), but
allowing for noise in the control of gene expression and assuming
that the two cells are intrinsically identical at the outset. koff is as-
sumed to be equal to 0.1 min⫺1 for the regulation both of her1/
her7 by activated Notch and of delta by Her1/Her7. After a few
synchronous oscillations, the system undergoes a switch and the
two cells become committed to opposite steady states—the stan-
dard outcome of lateral inhibition.
See the Supplemental Data for full details.

Current Biology
1406

ior. The cells again oscillate in synchrony, but with a
much longer period than before (133 min instead of 40
min), dictated by the delay in the feedback loop that
goes via Notch, instead of the delay in the direct intracel-
lular her1/her7 autoregulatory loop. If the contribution
to the her1/her7 transcription rate that is regulated di-
rectly by Delta-Notch activity independently of Her1/
Her7 is gradually increased, a transition occurs: when
this contribution becomes more than about 10% of the
Her1/Her7-regulated contribution, the system switches
from rapid oscillation with period ⵑ2(T ⫹ 1/b ⫹ 1/c ) to
slow oscillation with period ⵑ2(T ⫹ TN ⫹ 1/b ⫹ 1/c ⫹
1/bdeltaC ⫹ 1/cdeltaC). Between these two regimes, there
is a narrow transitional domain in which the first few
oscillations of the system are irregular, with mixed peri-
odicity, and the later oscillations are weak (Figure 5).
This is reminiscent of the disorders of somite segmenta-
tion reported for her1 ⫹ her7-deficient zebrafish em-
bryos [9].

The above conclusions are computed for the deter-
ministic case, with no noise in the control of gene ex-
pression. How must they be modified if we make the
model more realistic and take account of noise? A full
analysis will be presented elsewhere, but it seems that
noise has little effect so long as the flicker rate is reason-
ably high (koff ⬎ about 1 min⫺1). An important effect of
noise is seen, however, for smaller values of koff in the
case where her1 and her7 are regulated directly by
Delta-Notch activity alone, with no direct her1/her7 au-
torepression. Figure 5F shows results for koff ⫽ 0.1 min⫺1.
Whereas the deterministic model gives sustained slow
Delta-Notch-mediated oscillations (Figure 5E), the noisy
model displays an instability. After a variable number of
noisy oscillation cycles with a similar slow period, it
switches to a steady state representing the standard
outcome of Notch-mediated lateral inhibition, with the
two cells adopting opposite characters (one expressing
delta but not her1/her7, the other her1/her7 but not
delta).

The Somite Oscillator in Chick and Mouse
May Be More Complex
The somitogenesis oscillator in mouse and chick, as in
the zebrafish, depends on components of the Notch
signaling pathway [2]. Like her1/her7 in the fish, the
mouse her1 ortholog Hes7 oscillates, negatively regu-
lates its own expression, and is critical for the production
of oscillations [16, 17]. But there are also important dif-
ferences between the species:

1) Mutations in Notch pathway components such as
Delta1 and RBPJ␬ appear to abolish oscillations in the
mouse rather than merely desynchronize them as in the
fish [37, 38]. This may reflect a lower level of noise in
gene regulation, as explained above.

2) Delta genes are expressed at a steady mRNA level
in the posterior PSM of mouse and chick [39, 40], instead
of oscillating as in zebrafish.

3) The Lunatic fringe (Lfng) gene, coding for a glycosyl-
transferase that modulates Delta-Notch signaling,
shows oscillating expression in the posterior PSM of
mouse and chick and is critical for the genesis of oscilla-
tions [27–29, 41–43]; whereas in the corresponding re-

gion in zebrafish, the homologous gene does not appear
to be expressed at all [44, 45].

4) In the mouse, the Wnt signaling pathway also has
been reported to play a critical part in the genesis of
the oscillations [30], perhaps through a negative feed-
back loop controlling the expression of Axin2, which
oscillates, or perhaps simply in a permissive role, since
it is required to maintain Fgf8 expression in the PSM.
There is (as yet) no evidence for such an involvement
of Wnt signaling in the zebrafish.

5) The period of oscillation in mouse and chick is
90–120 min, 3–4 times longer than in the zebrafish,
allowing time for more complex chains of transcriptional
regulation.

How, then, does the oscillation mechanism proposed
for the zebrafish relate to the mechanism operating in
these other species? One possibility is that a switch of
the type illustrated in Figure 5 has occurred during the
evolution of birds and mammals – a switch from rapid
oscillation with a period governed by her1/her7 direct
autoregulation to slower oscillation with a period gov-
erned by intercellular signaling via the Notch pathway
and Lfng. As we have seen (Figure 5), a modest change
in parameters, even without any change in the circuit
diagram of the control system, can lead to qualitatively
different behavior, with a different part of the control
circuitry acting as pacemaker.

Another strong possibility is that the pacemaker
mechanism in the mouse is essentially the same as in
the zebrafish. Bessho et al. [16, 17] have analyzed the
role of Hes7 in detail, and they find persuasive evidence
that it functions in the mouse as a negative feedback
oscillator of just the sort described above for her1/her7
in the fish model, but with longer delays and slower
kinetics. They show, moreover, that Hes7 and Notch
proteins regulate expression of the Hes7 gene combina-
torially in just the way depicted in Figure 5A for her1/
her7, implying that Notch signaling might have a similar
synchronizing role in both systems.

Other workers have proposed still other mechanisms
for the mouse or chick somite oscillator, advocating a
central pacemaking role for Lfng [27, 28] or for Axin2
[30]. This is not the place to judge between these various
theories. All of them have experimental backing, and it
is possible that more than one of them is correct, since
several mutually supportive mechanisms may operate
in parallel. The general principles discussed in this paper
are relevant to all of them, since all of them postulate
that oscillations arise from feedback in the control of
transcription.

The Theory for Zebrafish Is Simple and Testable
In the zebrafish, the somitogenesis clock has a remark-
ably short period for a transcriptional oscillator, and its
rapidity places constraints on the mechanism. If the
oscillator is based on a transcriptional feedback loop,
as the evidence indicates, that loop has to be simple,
as there is no time for long, complex cascades. More-
over, to explain how the loop generates oscillations,
one has to postulate molecular lifetimes that are short,
synthesis rate constants that are high, and gene regula-
tory proteins that act at low concentrations; in each

The Zebrafish Somitogenesis Oscillator
1407

case, the values need to be close to the limits of what
has been reported in other systems. By measuring these
various quantities, as Bessho et al. [16, 18] have begun
to do in the mouse, and as we are currently attempting
to do in the zebrafish, we can put the model to the test.
The model is simple, and there is little in it that is
arbitrary. Nevertheless, while there is evidence for all
the postulated ingredients, and these ingredients seem
sufficient to explain the observations, they may not be
the whole story. We cannot, for example, exclude a role
for Wnt signaling or for posttranscriptional controls in
the genesis of the oscillations, and some data hint at
an involvement of components of the cell-cycle control
machinery [46, 47]. By making transgenic fish with modi-
fied her1/her7 genes, it should be possible to test spe-
cific quantitative predictions of the model and to dis-
cover whether the her1/her7 feedback loop is truly the
clock for somitogenesis.

The simplicity of the proposed oscillator mechanism
implies that it may be commonplace, operating in other
systems also: any gene whose product inhibits its own
transcription in the way described for her1/her7 should
oscillate, provided the transcriptional (or translational)
delay is long enough and the mRNA and protein lifetimes
are short enough. The oscillations of Hes1 expression
seen by Hirata et al. in cultured mammalian cells [18]
are a possible example. A detailed discussion of this
idea, including mathematical analysis of some aspects
not covered in the present paper, is given by Monk [48]
in this issue of the journal and points out at least three
instances where there is strongly suggestive experimen-
tal evidence.

Standard Notch Signaling Can Generate
Coordinated Oscillations instead
of Lateral Inhibition
As a byproduct of the analysis of the somitogenesis
oscillator, one stumbles over a surprising fact about
Notch signaling that forces a reconsideration of how
the Notch pathway may function in other systems. The
control circuitry corresponding to the result shown in
Figure 5E is simply the standard Notch signaling path-
way. This is famous in other contexts for its role in lateral
inhibition, forcing neighboring cells to become different
[49, 50]. But in Figure 5E, we see a completely different
outcome, synchronous oscillation, albeit transiently if
noise effects are strong (Figure 5F). This is predicted
for a wide range of parameter values, as soon as one
allows for delays in the signaling pathway (N. Monk,
personal communication). Such delays are always pres-
ent. So does Notch signaling in fact generate transcrip-
tional oscillations in any of the other innumerable tissues
where it is known to act? To answer this question, it will
be necessary to reexamine the evidence for each system
in the light of the revised theoretical analysis that takes
account of delays.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have seen that robust oscillating gene
expression is easy to produce. But it is not easy to
observe, and with present techniques, it is often likely
to go unnoticed, especially where there is nothing to

synchronize adjacent cells. Intracellular transcriptional
oscillations may thus be more common than we imagine
[51]. The principles illustrated here for our model of the
zebrafish somitogenesis oscillator may help to clarify the
behavior of other genes in other tissues and organisms.
They may also serve to emphasize that in studying these
biological feedback phenomena, intuition without the
support of a little mathematics can be a treacherous
guide.

Supplemental Data
The Supplemental Data include mathematical analysis of the oscilla-
tor mechanisms discussed, as well as the Mathematica programs
used to compute their behavior, both for deterministic and for sto-
chastic models of gene regulation; readers with Mathematica can
use the programs to explore the behavior for different parameter
values. Supplemental Data are available at http://www.current-
biology.com/cgi/content/full/13/16/1398/DC1/.

Acknowledgments

I thank Birgit Aerne, Simon Bullock, Franc¸ ois Giudicelli, David Ish-
Horowicz, Yun-Jin Jiang, and Paul Martin for comments, discus-
sions, and contact with the experimental realities of zebrafish somi-
togenesis, and Ryoichiro Kageyama, Diethard Tautz, and Achim
Gossler for advance copies of publications. I am especially indebted
to Nick Monk for alerting me to the importance of delays in the
Notch signaling pathway. The work was supported by Cancer Re-
search UK.

Received: March 31, 2003
Revised: June 19, 2003
Accepted: June 23, 2003
Published: August 19, 2003

References

1. Palmeirim, I., Henrique, D., Ish-Horowicz, D., and Pourquie, O.
(1997). Avian hairy gene expression identifies a molecular clock
linked to vertebrate segmentation and somitogenesis. Cell 91,
639–648.

2. Maroto, M., and Pourquie, O. (2001). A molecular clock involved

in somite segmentation. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 51, 221–248.

3. Dubrulle, J., McGrew, M.J., and Pourquie, O. (2001). FGF signal-
ing controls somite boundary position and regulates segmenta-
tion clock control of spatiotemporal Hox gene activation. Cell
106, 219–232.

4. Cooke, J., and Zeeman, E.C. (1976). A clock and wavefront
model for control of the number of repeated structures during
animal morphogenesis. J. Theor. Biol. 58, 455–476.

5. Jiang, Y.J., Aerne, B.L., Smithers, L., Haddon, C., Ish-Horowicz,
D., and Lewis, J. (2000). Notch signalling and the synchroniza-
tion of the somite segmentation clock. Nature 408, 475–479.

6. Holley, S.A., Julich, D., Rauch, G.J., Geisler, R., and Nusslein-
Volhard, C. (2002). her1 and the notch pathway function within
the oscillator mechanism that regulates zebrafish somitogen-
esis. Development 129, 1175–1183.

7. Holley, S.A., Geisler, R., and Nusslein-Volhard, C. (2000). Control
of her1 expression during zebrafish somitogenesis by a delta-
dependent oscillator and an independent wave-front activity.
Genes Dev. 14, 1678–1690.

8. Oates, A.C., and Ho, R.K. (2002). Hairy/E(spl)-related (Her) genes
are central components of the segmentation oscillator and dis-
play redundancy with the Delta/Notch signaling pathway in the
formation of anterior segmental boundaries in the zebrafish.
Development 129, 2929–2946.

9. Henry, C.A., Urban, M.K., Dill, K.K., Merlie, J.P., Page, M.F.,
Kimmel, C.B., and Amacher, S.L. (2002). Two linked hairy/En-
hancer of split-related zebrafish genes, her1 and her7, function
together to refine alternating somite boundaries. Development
129, 3693–3704.

Current Biology
1408

10. Takke, C., and Campos-Ortega, J.A. (1999). her1, a zebrafish
pair-rule like gene, acts downstream of Notch signalling to con-
trol somite development. Development 126, 3005–3014.

11. van Eeden, F.J., Holley, S.A., Haffter, P., and Nu¨ sslein-Volhard,
C. (1998). Zebrafish segmentation and pair-rule patterning. Dev.
Genet. 23, 65–76.

12. Glass, L., and Mackey, M.C. (1988). From Clocks to Chaos: The

Rhythms of Life (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).

13. Davis, R.L., and Turner, D.L. (2001). Vertebrate hairy and En-
hancer of split related proteins: transcriptional repressors regu-
lating cellular differentiation and embryonic patterning. Onco-
gene 20, 8342–8357.

14. Gajewski, M., and Voolstra, C. (2002). Comparative analysis of
somitogenesis related genes of the hairy/Enhancer of split class
in Fugu and zebrafish. BMC Genomics 3, 21.

15. Gajewski, M., Sieger, D., Alt, B., Leve, C., Hans, S., Wolff, C.,
Rohr, K.B., and Tautz, D. (2003). Anterior and posterior waves
of cyclic her1 gene expression are differentially regulated in the
presomitic mesoderm of zebrafish. Development 130, in press.
16. Bessho, Y., Sakata, R., Komatsu, S., Shiota, K., Yamada, S.,
and Kageyama, R. (2001). Dynamic expression and essential
functions of Hes7 in somite segmentation. Genes Dev. 15, 2642–
2647.

17. Bessho, Y., Hirata, H., Masamizu, Y., and Kageyama, R. (2003).
Periodic repression by the bHLH factor Hes7 is an essential
mechanism for the somite segmentation clock. Genes Dev. 17,
1451–1456.

18. Hirata, H., Yoshiura, S., Ohtsuka, T., Bessho, Y., Harada, T.,
Yoshikawa, K., and Kageyama, R. (2002). Oscillatory expression
of the bHLH factor Hes1 regulated by a negative feedback loop.
Science 298, 840–843.

19. Jordan, D.W., and Smith, P. (1999). Nonlinear Ordinary Differen-

tial Equations, 3rd Edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

20. Elowitz, M.B., and Leibler, S. (2000). A synthetic oscillatory net-

work of transcriptional regulators. Nature 403, 335–338.

21. Alberts, B., Johnson, A., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K., and
Walter, P. (2002). Molecular Biology of the Cell, 4th Edition (New
York: Garland/Taylor and Francis).

22. Glickman, M.H., and Ciechanover, A. (2002). The ubiquitin-pro-
teasome proteolytic pathway: destruction for the sake of con-
struction. Physiol. Rev. 82, 373–428.

23. Wang, Y., Liu, C.L., Storey, J.D., Tibshirani, R.J., Herschlag, D.,
and Brown, P.O. (2002). Precision and functional specificity in
mRNA decay. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 5860–5865.

24. Ucker, D.S., and Yamamoto, K.R. (1984). Early events in the
stimulation of mammary tumor virus RNA synthesis by glucocor-
ticoids. Novel assays of transcription rates. J. Biol. Chem. 259,
7416–7420.

25. O’Brien, T., and Lis, J.T. (1993). Rapid changes in Drosophila
transcription after an instantaneous heat shock. Mol. Cell. Biol.
13, 3456–3463.

26. Audibert, A., Weil, D., and Dautry, F. (2002). In vivo kinetics of
mRNA splicing and transport in mammalian cells. Mol. Cell. Biol.
22, 6706–6718.

27. Morales, A.V., Yasuda, Y., and Ish-Horowicz, D. (2002). Periodic
Lunatic fringe expression is controlled during segmentation by
a cyclic transcriptional enhancer responsive to notch signaling.
Dev. Cell 3, 63–74.

28. Dale, J.K., Maroto, M., Dequeant, M.L., Malapert, P., McGrew,
M., and Pourquie, O. (2003). Periodic notch inhibition by lunatic
fringe underlies the chick segmentation clock. Nature 421,
275–278.

29. Cole, S.E., Levorse, J.M., Tilghman, S.M., and Vogt, T.F. (2002).
Clock regulatory elements control cyclic expression of Lunatic
fringe during somitogenesis. Dev. Cell 3, 75–84.

30. Aulehla, A., Wehrle, C., Brand-Saberi, B., Kemler, R., Gossler,
A., Kanzler, B., and Herrmann, B.G. (2003). Wnt3a plays a major
role in the segmentation clock controlling somitogenesis. Dev.
Cell 3, 395–406.

31. Swain, P.S., Elowitz, M.B., and Siggia, E.D. (2002). Intrinsic and
extrinsic contributions to stochasticity in gene expression. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 12795–12800.
Itoh, M., Kim, C.H., Palardy, G., Oda, T., Jiang, Y.J., Maust, D.,
Yeo, S.Y., Lorick, K., Wright, G.J., Ariza-McNaughton, L., et al.

32.

(2003). Mind bomb is a ubiquitin ligase that is essential for
efficient activation of Notch signaling by Delta. Dev. Cell 4,
67–82.

33. Lippincott-Schwartz, J., Roberts, T.H., and Hirschberg, K.
(2000). Secretory protein trafficking and organelle dynamics in
living cells. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 16, 557–589.

34. Wieland, F.T., Gleason, M.L., Serafini, T.A., and Rothman, J.E.
(1987). The rate of bulk flow from the endoplasmic reticulum to
the cell surface. Cell 50, 289–300.

35. Fries, E., Gustafsson, L., and Peterson, P.A. (1984). Four secre-
tory proteins synthesized by hepatocytes are transported from
endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi complex at different rates.
EMBO J. 3, 147–152.

36. Shimizu, K., Chiba, S., Hosoya, N., Kumano, K., Saito, T., Kuro-
kawa, M., Kanda, Y., Hamada, Y., and Hirai, H. (2000). Binding
of Delta1, Jagged1, and Jagged2 to Notch2 rapidly induces
cleavage, nuclear translocation, and hyperphosphorylation of
Notch2. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 6913–6922.

37. Jouve, C., Palmeirim, I., Henrique, D., Beckers, J., Gossler, A.,
Ish-Horowicz, D., and Pourquie, O. (2000). Notch signalling is
required for cyclic expression of the hairy-like gene HES1 in the
presomitic mesoderm. Development 127, 1421–1429.

38. del Barco Barrantes, I., Elia, A.J., Wu¨ nsch, K., Hrabe´ de Angelis,
M., Mak, T.W., Rossant, J., Conlon, R.A., Gossler, A., and de la
Pompa, J.L. (1999). Interaction between Notch signalling and
Lunatic fringe during somite boundary formation in the mouse.
Curr. Biol. 9, 470–480.

39. Bettenhausen, B., Hrabe de Angelis, M., Simon, D., Guenet,
J.L., and Gossler, A. (1995). Transient and restricted expression
during mouse embryogenesis of Dll1, a murine gene closely
related to Drosophila Delta. Development 121, 2407–2418.

40. Palmeirim, I., Dubrulle, J., Henrique, D., Ish-Horowicz, D., and
Pourquie, O. (1998). Uncoupling segmentation and somitogen-
esis in the chick presomitic mesoderm. Dev. Genet. 23, 77–85.
41. Serth, K., Schuster-Gossler, K., Cordes, R., and Gossler, A.
(2003). Transcriptional oscillation of lunatic fringe is essential
for somitogenesis. Genes Dev. 17, 912–925.

42. Zhang, N., and Gridley, T. (1998). Defects in somite formation

in lunatic fringe-deficient mice. Nature 394, 374–377.

43. Evrard, Y.A., Lun, Y., Aulehla, A., Gan, L., and Johnson, R.L.
(1998). lunatic fringe is an essential mediator of somite segmen-
tation and patterning. Nature 394, 377–381.

44. Prince, V.E., Holley, S.A., Bally-Cuif, L., Prabhakaran, B., Oates,
A.C., Ho, R.K., and Vogt, T.F. (2001). Zebrafish lunatic fringe
demarcates segmental boundaries. Mech. Dev. 105, 175–180.
45. Leve, C., Gajewski, M., Rohr, K.B., and Tautz, D. (2001). Homo-
logues of c-hairy1 (her9) and lunatic fringe in zebrafish are ex-
pressed in the developing central nervous system, but not in
the presomitic mesoderm. Dev. Genes Evol. 211, 493–500.

46. Gorodilov, Y.N. (1992). Rhythmic processes in lower vertebrate
embryogenesis and their role for developmental control. Zool.
Sci. 9, 1101–1111.

47. Primmett, D.R., Norris, W.E., Carlson, G.J., Keynes, R.J., and
Stern, C.D. (1989). Periodic segmental anomalies induced by
heat shock in the chick embryo are associated with the cell
cycle. Development 105, 119–130.

48. Monk, N.A.M. (2003). Oscillatory expression of Hes1, p53 and
NF-kappaB driven by transcriptional time delays. Curr. Biol. 13,
1409–1413.

49. Lewis, J. (1998). Notch signalling and the control of cell fate

choices in vertebrates. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 583–589.

50. Collier, J.R., Monk, N.A., Maini, P.K., and Lewis, J.H. (1996).
Pattern formation by lateral inhibition with feedback: a mathe-
matical model of Delta-Notch intercellular signalling. J. Theor.
Biol. 183, 429–446.

51. Kippert, F., and Hunt, P. (2000). Ultradian clocks in eukaryotic
microbes: from behavioural observation to functional genomics.
Bioessays 22, 16–22.

