MATHEMATICAL DESCRIPTION OF A BURSTING
PACEMAKER NEURON BY A MODIFICATION
OF THE HODGKIN-HUXLEY EQUATIONS

R. E. PLANT and M. KIM
From the Department ofMathematics, University of California, Davis, California 95616,
and the School ofElectrical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853

ABSTRACT
Modifications based on experimental results reported in the literature are
made to the Hodgkin-Huxley equations to describe the electrophysiological behavior
of the Aplysia abdominal ganglion R15 cell. The system is then further modified to
describe the effects with the application of the drug tetrodotoxin (TTX) to the cells'
bathing medium. Methods of the qualitative theory of differential equations are used
to determine the conditions necessary for such a system of equations to have an
oscillatory solution. A model satisfying these conditions is shown to predict many
experimental observations of R15 cell behavior. Numerical solutions are obtained for
differential equations satisfying the conditions of the model.
These solutions are
shown to have a form similar to that of the bursting which is characteristic of this
cell, and to predict many results of experiments conducted on this cell. The physiologi-
cal implications of the model are discussed.

INTRODUCTION

The central nervous systems of invertebrates contain many cells which display a regular
spontaneous activity in the absence of any synaptic input.
This activity generally
occurs in one of two modes: regular firing (known as "beating"), or clusters of spikes
separated by long periods of hyperpolarization (known as "bursting") (Carpenter,
1973). The abdominal ganglion of the mollusc Aplysia contains cells which display
both of these behaviors (Frazier et al., 1967); in particular, the cell designated R15 by
Frazier et al. normally fires in the bursting mode.

There is strong evidence (Carpenter, 1973, Junge and Stephens, 1973) that the burst-
ing of cell R15 is due to a cyclic variation in potassium conductance. Strumwasser
(1968) found that application of the drug tetrodotoxin (TTX) to the cells' bathing
medium resulted in the abolition of action potentials and the emergence of an under-
lying slow oscillation. Mathieu and Roberge (1971) reported the effects of experimental
injection of currents through the membrane of the TTX-treated cell. However, the
mechanism which causes the cyclic variation in potassium conductance underlying the
slow wave has not been determined. In a previous paper (Plant and Kim, 1975) a quali-
tative method was developed to determine a model based on experimental results in the

IkOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

227

literature, which would predict the experimental observations of the slow wave. In
this paper, we use this method to modify the Hodgkin-Huxley equations (Hodgkin
and Huxley, 1952) through the addition of terms, the existence of which may be in-
ferred from published experimental results, to describe the behavior of an R15 cell
bathed in a medium containing TTX. Qualitative conditions are then determined
which are sufficient for a two-dimensional approximation of the model to have a limit
cycle. A numerical example of the model is then given. The solutions of this example
are shown to display bursting and to duplicate many, but not all, experimental results.
The physiological implications of the model are then discussed, and a more compli-
cated version of the model is presented which predicts recent results not predicted by
the simpler model.

LIST OF SYMBOLS

Membrane voltage
Membrane capacitance
Nernst equilibrium potential of combined inwardly flowing ions
Nernst equilibrium potential of K+ ions
Nernst equilibrium potential of leakage ions
"Activation" term
"Inactivation" term

i = I, K, A, P

V
C
VI
VK
VL
Xi
YI,
Tx,( V) "Activation" time constant
Tyj( V) "Inactivation" time constant
Sf( V) Steady-state "activation"
Z,(V) Steady-state "inactivation")
g,
gT
I4P
ett

t

Maximum ionic conductance, i = I, K, A, P, L
Inward conductance in the presence of T-TX
Ionic electrogenic pump current
External current controlled by the experimenter
Time

The subscripts I, K, A, P, T, L correspond to membrane channels.
ley's (1952) notation, T,, corresponds to rx1, m. to S1(V), etc.

The functions S,(V) and Z,(V) are defined as having the following properties (see Fig. 1).

In Hodgkin and Hux-

S(V)
1-1

0

Z(V)

v

FIGURE I

Typical S and Z functions as described in the text.

228

BIoPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

(a)

S(V)

lim S,(V) =I
v--*+ 0
lim S,(V) = 0

(b)

dS,/dV > 0

Zf(V)

lim Z,(V) = 0

v- +X

lim Z,(V) = I

dZI/dV < 0.

ANALYSIS OF THE PROBLEM

In our notation, the Hodgkin-Huxley equations are:

- V) + gKA4(V1 - V) - V(V) - V) + aet],

V = (l/C)[g,XY,Y(1
Xl = I1/TX1(mV)][S(V) - Xli],
Y, = II/TY1(V)J[Zi(V) - Y,],
XK = [l/TXK(V)][SK(V) - XKJ.

(I A)

(I B)

These equations were formulated to describe the behavior of the squid giant axon
(Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952). In a voltage clamp experiment, when the membrane
potential is changed from near its resting value to a more depolarized level, the potas-
sium current in this axon is observed to asymptotically approach a new value in a
monotonically increasing manner. When a similar experiment is performed on the
R15 cell, the potassium current is observed to increase rapidly to a peak, and then
decrease monotonically to its new value (Faber and Klee, 1972). A similar phenomena
was analyzed in nudibranch central neurons by Connor and Stevens (1971), who found
that this current sag could be explained by invoking a second potassium channel, here
denoted by the subscript A, independent from the Hodgkin-Huxley K channel, which
contained an inactivation as well as an activation term. Mathematically, Eq. I A of
the Hodgkin-Huxley equations may be replaced by
V = (l/C)[g1X3Yy(JI - V) + (gKX4 + gAX Y,)(J' - V)

(2)
and the corresponding activation and inactivation terms are added to the system,
namely,

+ gL( VL - V) + Ie..t]9

XA = [I/TXA(V)11SA(V)
XA],
YA = [1/TYA(V)J[ZA(V) - YAI]

(3)
There are three differences between Eq. 2 and the corresponding equation of Connor
and Stevens: in the Connor-Stevens equation there are two potassium K activation
terms, the equilibrium potential of the A system is slightly different from VK, and
XA is raised to the fourth power. None of these differences will affect the qualitative
behavior of Eq. 2.

PLANT AND KIM Hodgkin-Huxley Modificationfor Bursting Pacemaker Neuron

229

Connor and Stevens also reported, but did not include in their equation, a third
potassium "channel," having an activation time constant much longer than any of the
others observed in the system. What may be a similar phenomenon was observed by
Junge and Brodwick (1970) in the Aplysia R2 cell, and its existence in R15 may be
inferred from Junge and Stephens' (1973) measurements of a very slow potassium con-
ductance change. In addition, Aplysia cells are known to contain an electrogenic so-
dium pump (Cooke et al., 1974) generating a hyperpolarizing current, which will be
assumed constant. The effect of these terms will be to replace Eq. 2 by
V - (l1/C)[g1XXY1(V - V) + (gKXK + gKX YA + g_X,)(V- V)

+ gL(VL - V) + IeP + lext]

with the addition of the equation

We shall assume that 'xp is not a function of voltage, and that

Xp = (l/rx1)[Sp(V) - Xp].

(4)

(5)

TX,(V),TyI(V),TXK(V), rXA(V),TYA(V) << rXP,'

for all values of V We will assume that when the cell is bathed in a medium containing
TTX, the variability of the I channel is eliminated (Narahashi et al., 1964; Sastre,
1974). Recent experimental results (Smith et al., 1975) indicates that bursting cells
possess an inward channel (possibly Na+-conducting) which does not inactivate com-
pletely. The simplest (in terms of economy of variables) modification of the equations
consistent with such results is the addition of a constant term, g-. (The consequences
of a more complicated model, with voltage-dependent behavior in a second channel, is
examined in the Discussion). We will add this term, and further assume that its value
is not affected by the addition of TTX to the bathing medium. Our final system of
equations for the R 15 cell in a normal medium is then
V = (l/C)[(g1XY, + gT)(VI - V) + (gKXK + g AXXY, + gpXP)(VK _ V)

(6)
together with Eqs. 1 B, 3, and 5. In a medium containing TJX, assume g, = 0 and we
get
V = (l/C)[gT(I' - V) + (gKX4 + gAXA YA + grXP)(V- V)

+ gL(VL -V) + Iep +I4it ,

+ gL( VL

V) + I*p + Ie,t ]

(7)
instead of Eq. 6. We propose Eqs. 1 B, 3, 5, 7 as a model for the behavior of the R15
cell, with Eqs. I B, 3, 5, 7 as a model for its behavior in TTX. In the Appendix we
demonstrate that for certain values of the components of the model, we may expect
Eqs. I B, 3, 5, 7 to have an oscillatory solution, and in the Discussion we demonstrate
that this solution may be predicted to simulate the behavior of R15 in TTX. In the

230

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

next section we demonstrate numerically that a properly chosen example of the model
has a bursting solution.

DEVELOPMENT OF A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE

We start with the basic Hodgkin-Huxley equations, modified to make depolarization
of the membrane positive, in accord with recent notation (Fitzhugh, 1969, p. 24).
First these will be modified to account for the observation that the conductance of the
R15 membrane is approximately ji
that of the squid giant axon (Carpenter, 1973).
Thus, we divide all of the conductances by one hundred. The values of VN. and VK in
the Hodgkin-Huxley model were set so as to make the resting potential equal to zero;
we will use the values of VN, and VK given in the literature for the R15 cell. Thus,
we must rescale the voltage in the equations for the time constants and steady-state
terms in Eqs. 1 B, 3, 5, and 7 in the following way:

VRIs = a Vqid + b,

(8)

where

a = (VNa - VK)squid/(
b = [(VN,)quid(VK)RIS - (1)R1S(VK)squid]/(AVK -

- VK)RIS5,

)RIS-

Better results are obtained by further translations of VRI5 (i.e. other than the addition
of the factor b); these are incorporated in the development.

Finally, to account for the observation (Carpenter, 1973) that the RI5 membrane is
relatively more permeable to sodium and less to potassium than the squid membrane
we raise the value of the term g, from 1.2 to 4. Following Wachtel and Wilson (1973)
we set V, at 30 mV and VK at -75 mV. We let VL equal -40 mV.
The time

TABLE I

PARAMETERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE MODEL RESULTING FROM MODIFICATION

OF THE HODGKIN-HUXLEY EQUATIONS

8

91-4.0
V -30
C- I1F
SI(V) -,,a/(a. + m)
rxl - 12.5/(am + ft,)
where

K- 0.30
VK --75

L- 0.003
VL --40 (mV)

(mho x 10 3)

Zi(V) - ah/(ah + p@h)
Ty1 - 12.5/(ah + Ph)

SK(V)- a,,/(a, + #)
rXK - 12.5/(a,, + #)

am(

)

ah(V)

0exp([26 - 1J/lVI-1m (V)
0.07 exp(- 51 - 1.21 V)
j6h(V)

20

exp(-21 - 1.3 V]/ 10)

_

4exp([51 - 1.2 V]/18)

exp([21_

1.3 V]/10) + 1
I

a,,(V) -

0.01 -21 - 1.21 VI

exp ([-21 - 1.21 V]/10) - 1

#,(V) - 0.125 exp([-31 - V]/80)

PLANT AND KIM Hodgkin-Huxley Modification for Bursting Pacemaker Neuron

231

PARAMETERS ADDED TO THE MODIFIED HODGKIN-HUXLEY

EQUATIONS TO SIMULATE THE R15 CELL

TABLE II

g4 - 0.06

T- 0.008
SA(V) -11 +exp(-0.08[V+451)1-
TXA - 10 ms
Sp(V) -[1 + exp(-0.7[V + 471)1-
rxp - 8,000 ms

(mho x 10-3)

gp - 0.015
ZA(V) -[1 + exp(0.27[V +50])]FI
TYA - 235 ms
lop- -0.22pA

constants of the modified Hodgkin-Huxley parameters are obtained by comparison of
the spike widths of the R15 and squid giant axon. The squid axon has a spike width of
approximately 2 ms, while that of the R15 cell is approximately 25 ms, so that the
Hodgkin-Huxley time constants are multiplied by 12.5. The parameters of our Eqs.
1 B, 3, 5, and 6 which result from modification of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations are
given in Table I. The value C = 1 ,F has been chosen to match that of Hodgkin and
Huxley. The model is therefore based on a membrane patch having a capacitance of
1 ,uF, rather than an area of I cm2. We now must choose the additional parameters of
the system in such a way as to satisfy the conditions derived in the Appendix such that
In keeping with the formulations of
the reduced system, Eqs. 12, has a limit cycle.
Hodgkin and Huxley, we will use exponential logistic functions to describe our S and
Z functions. These are functions of the form

f(V) = [1 + exp(-7y[V-0-)]-',

v
(mV)

0.3

0.6

0.9

1.2

1.5 Xxp

FIGURE 2
('Cxt + I4p); these values are shown beneath each V - 0 nulicline.

Phase portrait of the nullclines of system 12 for several values of the parameter

232

BIoPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

where Jy
is the maximum magnitude of the slope off, occurring at the inflection
point, and 0 is the location on the V axis of the inflection point.
It was found that
multiplication of the Hodgkin-Huxley time constants by a factor of 12.5 brought them
within the range of the corresponding time constants of Connor and Stevens. For this
reason, Connor and Stevens' values for the A-channel time constants were used in our
model. The additional parameters are listed in Table II. For purposes of comparison,
the Connor and Stevens data for their ZA term may be represented by ZAcs =
[1 + exp(0.04[V + 70])]-l. The reason for this difference will be considered in the
Discussion.

Fig. 2 shows the nullclines of V = 0 and I, = 0 of the two-dimensional system 12
drawn in the (V, X) phase plane. It is evident that for values of Ip + I,[ between
approximately -0.05 and -0.30 the nullclines wil! intersect in a region of positive slope
of the V = 0 nullclines. Thus our analysis predicts that the system of equations 12 with
parameters given in Tables I and II will have a stable limit cycle, and that for large
values of rxP the system of equations I B, 3, 5, and 7 will have a periodic, oscillatory
solution. In the next section we analyze the full model numerically.

NUMERICAL ANALYSIS

In this section we analyze the example of our model developed in the last section, and
It is shown that the model of the system in
pe;form numerical "experiments" with it.
TTX displays an oscillatory solution. This system being itself a special case of the full
system in which the variable terms involving inward current are abolished, we then re-
store these terms to the system to demonstrate that the full system displays the proper-
ties of bursting. When reference is made in this section to the equation the parameters
will be assumed to have the values developed in the last section.

Two classes of methods for the numerical solution of ordinary differential equations
are commonly used: the single step (e.g., Runge-Kutta) method and the multistep (e.g.,
Adams-Moulton) method (Hamming, 1973). A comparison was first made between
these two methods to determine which was best suited for this problem. Programs were
written to solve the equations using each method. The variable step size Adams-
Moulton method was found to have extremely severe "step size oscillation" problems
(Hamming, 1973, p. 410) and was rejected. The slightly increased speed of the fixed
step size Adams-Moulton method was offset by the greater accuracy of the Runge-
Kutta method, and the latter was selected as the method of choice for the problem.
For a more detailed comparison of these methods as applied to the solution of the
Hodgkin-Huxley equations see Moore and Ramon (1974).

In the initial computer runs, an approximate method was used in which, when the
system was varying slowly, the fastest variables were set to their steady-state values
and the step size was increased accordingly (Noble, 1962). In the runs whose results
are displayed in this paper, this approximation was abandoned and the full system was
always used. The step size was successively halved until further reduction did not
I121 < 0.1). The final step size
change the solution significantly (for t < 1 s, V| -

PLANT AND KIM Hodgkin-Huxley Modificationfor Bursting Pacemaker Neuron

233

-30T

VI

_50

J

IJ

l

t, seconds

FIGURE 3

Numerical solution of Eqs. 12 for l.t -0.

used was 1 ms. The programs were written in FORTRAN, and run on Cornell Uni-
versity's IBM 370/168 computer after being compiled in FORTRAN H. No run took
longer than 2 min CPU time.

The first numerical "experiment" is to verify that Eqs. 12 actually have a stable
limit cycle. Fig. 3 shows the solution of Eqs. 12 for I.,t = 0 and confirms a periodic,
oscillatory solution. The next test is to return to the full system of equations 1 B, 3, 5,
and 7. Fig. 4 shows the solution of these equations for three values of I,. The system
1 B, 3, 5, and 7 is seen to move more slowly than the system 12, which is due to the fact
that three of the differential equations of the full system have been replaced by alge-
braic equations in the reduced system. Table III gives the period and amplitude of the
slow wave for three valves of IJ,.
. Both the period and amplitude are seen to decrease
with depolarizing current and increase with hyperpolarizing current, as predicted in
the Discussion from geometrical considerations. The slow wave is thus seen to con-
form to all the experimental observations of Mathieu and Roberge (1971). Following
this confirmation, Eq. 6 was substituted for Eq. 7 in the model to test whether the full
system would display bursting as seen in the RI5 cell. Fig. 5 gives the results of this
computer run for three values of I., + I'pq For It - 0 (Fig. 5a), the system is seen to
display bursting of a form very similar to that of the RI5 cell. The reason for the lack
of low frequency leading spikes in the burst will be given in the Discussion. For It +
Iep = 0 (or I., = +0.22), Fig. 5b, top trace, the system is seen to display "beat-
ing," due to the slow wave's state point being fixed at a stable upper equilibrium point.

55-

-35
V,45
mV
-35
-45/
-55

-35

-45-

-55

0

[/

/

v

10

20

t, seconds

Ig,t =+.03

= 0

Iex=-.03

30

FIGuRE 4 Numerical solution of Eqs. I B, 3, 5, 7 for three values of I.,t, shown to the
right of the plots.

234

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

PERIOD AND AMPLITUDE OF OSCILLATIONS OF SYSTEM I B, 3, 5, 7,

WITH PARAMETERS AS IN TABLES I, II, AND III

TABLE III

Ie,t

I&A
+0.03

0

-0.03

Period

s
9.3
9.9
10.9

Amplitude

mV
12.6
13.3
13.5

We have observed that the R15 cell occasionally spontaneously alters its output from
a bursting to a beating mode. When the cell is in the beating mode, the injection of
hyperpolarizing current through the recording electrode will return the cell to a burst-
ing mode. Upon cessation of the current injection the cell returns to a beating mode.
Fig. 6 shows the results of one such experiment. By the application of ouabain, Junge
and Stephens (1973) have demonstrated that the beating mode of the R15 cell is asso-
ciated with the abolishment of the electrogenic pump current. For It = -0.14, Fig.
5 b, bottom trace, the spontaneous activity is abolished, due to the slow wave's state
point being moved to a lower stable equilibrium point. Thus the model is seen to ade-
quately predict the result ofexperiments.

Eaton (1972) has argued that the current "sag" displayed in voltage clamping experi-
ments is due not primarily to potassium inactivation, but to potassium accumulation.
This argument is based on results (Eaton, 1972, Table 2) which show that for step
changes in voltage from -40 mV to -2 mV, the ratio of peak to final conductance does

40.

a

mv -20--

mV

-60

40-.

20

b

-,10 i.

r~ seconds

|12dir

e§@@

iiiiiiiillllllll

-60.

t, seconds

-0.36

Nunxrical solution of Eqs. I B, 3, S, 6. (a) Izsxt -0; solution displays bursting.

(b)
FiGuRE S
Upper plot: I<,,[t - +0.22(Ie,m + lop - 0); solution displays beating. Lower plot: Iet - -0.14
(1e.t + lop - 0-36); oscillation is abolished.

PLANT AND KIM Hodgkin-Huxley Modificationfor Bursting Pacemaker Neuron

235

11

FIGURE 6 Results ofexperiments with Rl5 cell. (I) Normal bursting model. (II) Recorded later,
showing cell in beating mode. At arrow a hyperpolarizing current is injected.
At arrow c,
hypepolarizing current injection ceased. Arrows b, d, and e represent artifacts.

not drop more than 30°%. This result is in accord with our model since at -40 mV, our
potassium inactivation parameter has a steady state value ZA (-40) = 0.063. We would
thus argue that current sag in step changes from -40 mV to -2 mV is indeed due to
potassium accumulation since the potassium inactivation "channel" is almost com-
pletely inactivated, but that in step changes from a more hyperpolarized state, potas-
sium inactivation should also be observed (Fig. 7).
Fig. 8 shows the steady-state
current voltage relationship (solid line) of system 1 b, 3, 5, 6. The dashed lines in
Fig. 8 represent typical I- Vcurves for (a) an ordinary nerve cell, and (b) for a cell dis-
playing anomalous rectification (Faber and Klee, 1972). The negative slope steady-
state conductance may be regarded as a more "advanced" form of anomalous rectifica-
tion. This I-V curve is in good agreement with experimental results (Gola, 1974;

236

BIoPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

.2

0.8

0.4

I,A/0A

.2

FIGuRE 7

FiGURE 8

Numerical solution of potassium current under voltage clamp conditions.

FIGURE 7
is for V - -2 mV starting from initial values of Vas shown.
Steady-state I-V relationship of the model. Dashed line a shows the typical I-V
FIGuRE 8
curve of a normal nerve cell, dashed line b shows that of a cell displaying anomalous rectification.

Solution

Smith et al., 1975; Wilson and Wachtel, 1974).
It must be emphasized that the I-V
curve is not a phase plane nullcline, and should not be confused with "N" or "S"
shaped curves such as those of Fig. 2.

DISCUSSION

In an earlier paper (Plant and Kim, 1975), the two-dimensional model developed in the
Appendix was used to predict qualitatively and suggest an interpretation of many
experimentally observed behaviors of the Aplysia R15 cell in TTX. We will discuss
these in greater detail here. First, we give a descriptive account of the events of one
cycle of the slow wave. Starting at t = 0 (Fig. 4), the term gA SA ZA has a low value,
and the term gT of Smith et al. causes V to rise toward V,.
This rise is arrested
and turned around by the activation of the term X.. The drop toward VK is then
accelerated by the regenerative effect of the inactivation YA. The effect of this inactiva-
tion is then abolished by the dropping in value of XA, and the cycle repeats. As ob-
served by Mathieu and Roberge (1971), the amplitude and period of the slow wave are
both increased by passing a hyperpolarizing current through the membrane, and de-
creased by a depolarizing current. The geometrical interpretation of this phenomenon
is given in Fig. 9. Referring to this figure, the structure of the equation Xp = G(V)
(Eq. 13) makes the one parameter family of curves dependent on Ih., fold under them-
selves as I.., becomes more negative (this can also be seen in Fig. 2). Thus the dimen-
sion a1, which is the amplitude of the discontinuous oscillation, becomes larger as I,xt

PLANT AND KIM Hodgkin-Huxley Modificationfor Bursting Pacemaker Neuron

237

V

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ lb i--

FIouu 9

FIGURE 10

FIouna 9 Qualitative behavior of the system 12 for hyperpolarizing, zero, and depolarizing ex-
ternal current. See text for further explanation.
Frnuazl0
Dashed lines a, b, c, rersnt
the effects of strong hyperpolarizing currents applied at succesively later points in a burst.
Thin line represets full limit cycle.

Explanation of the phenomenon of "resetting."

becomes less positive or more negative. Furthermore, as the state point jumps from
one stable portion of the curve (shown as the heavy lines of Fig. 9) to another, the
amount of time that it spends on a given portion is an increasing function of that por-
tion's distance from the slow (4,) nullcline.
These distances, shown as b, and *,
in Fig. 9 are seen to increase as Je,[ becomes more negative, with the c* increasing
more than the b1.

When a stronger depolarizing or hyperpolarizing current is passed through the mem-
brane, the membrane oscillation is seen to stop, leaving the voltage at a fixed point
near the maximum or minimum value of the potential when it was oscillating (Mathieu
and Roberge, 1971). Referring to Fig. 2, with 4op - -0.22, it can be seen that suffi-
ciently large positive or negative values of I4,, will move the V = 0 nullcline to a
position where it intersects the X,P = 0 nullcline at a stable equilibrium point, and that
the stable point is near the maximum or minimum value of the oscillation. The model
also predicts the effect of ouabain, which is to abolish the membrane oscillation at a
point near the maximum oscillatory value (Junge and Stevens, 1973); Junge and Ste-
vens also showed that the application of a hyperpolarizing current would restart the
oscillation. In the model, with 4,,,[ = 0, the effect of ouabain would be to make Iep,
equal zero, moving the equilibrium point to a stable position (Fig. 2).
Setting I.,,
equal to a negative value returns the system to an oscillatory mode.
Strumwasser
(1973) has observed that the addition of Li+ abolishes the slow wave. This may be
explained in terms of our model by assuming that Li+ makes the T component ineffec-
tive.

238

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

Finally, we examine the phenomenon of resetting (Strumwasser, 1967). When a
hyperpolarizing current strong enough to artificially terminate a burst is passed
through the membrane, and then the external current is returned to zero, the bursting
process is "reset" in phase (Winfree, 1970). The phase relationship between the reset
cycle and the original cycle depends on the position in the burst at which the hyper-
polarizing current was applied. If the hyperpolarizing current was applied early in the
burst, the reset burst occurs almost immediately after termination of hyperpolariza-
tion. As the current is applied later in the burst, the length of time between termina-
tion of the current and the onset of the reset burst increases. The mechanism of this
phenomenon is explained graphically in Fig. 10. Dashed lines a, b, and c represent
the effects of a strong hyperpolarizing pulse applied at successively later points in the
burst. In each case the state point is moved off the upper portion onto the lower por-
tion (the interburst hyperpolarization), due to an instantaneous rightward shift of the
V - 0 nullcline (Fig. 2), but the time required to reattain the upper portion is succes-
sively increased.

It is evident that other dynamic terms could be used in place of those in Eq. 6, and
still result in a limit cycle in system 12. For instance, consider a slow sodium inactiva-
If X, is replaced by an inactivation term YQ with a large
tion in place of X,.
time constant, Eq. 6 becomes
V = (1/C)1(gX3 Y, + gQ YQ + gT)(JI - V) +_gKX4 + gxX YX)(VK - V)
+ gL(VL - V) + lop + Ixt],

(9)
and it is easy to show that a reduced system similar to that of Eqs. 12 may have a
limit cycle. However, unlike both Eqs. 12 and the real R15 cell, a reduced system
based on Eq. 9 has a limit cycle which decreases in amplitude with increasing hyper-
polarizing current, and thus Eq. 9 must be regarded as being less likely than Eq. 6.
Lux and Eckert (1974) report the existence of a "slow" inward current. While this
current is indeed slow, its time constant is still an order of magnitude less than ryp,
and thus, in terms of our model, the current is "relatively fast." Their results may be
interpreted as supporting the two variable inward channel model discussed in the sec-
ond to last paragraph of this paper.

There are three differences in the waveshapes of the burst between our model and
the typically observed output of the Aplysia R15 cell: (1) There are no low frequency
leading spikes in the burst; (2) the spike undershoot in the model remains constant
rather than decreasing; (3) the spike width in the model remains constant throughout
the burst. In the R15 cell, the spike width increases during the burst (Strumwasser,
1967). We shall consider each ofthese differences in turn.

The absence of leading spikes in the burst may be explained as follows.

It was
originally postulated that the relaxation time of the voltage process was much less
than that of the Xp process. This results in almost discontinuous motions in the phase
space (Fig. I1, solid line). Numerical experiments indicate that a similar time course
could have been obtained by increasing the relaxation time of the V equation and

PLANT AND KIM Hodgkin-Huxley Modificationfor Bursting Pacemaker Neuron

239

decreasing that of the Xp equation.
(Fig. 11, dashed line) which would have resulted in the appearance of leading spikes.

This would have given a smooth oscillation

The constant post spike hyperpolarizing undershoot is probably due to the lack of
potassium accumulation effect in the model. The effect of potassium accumulation is
to raise this undershoot during multiple spiking, (Frankenhaeuser and Hodgkin, 1956).
However, based on the results of Eaton (1972, Fig. 2), such an effect cannot be ascribed
to a simple one dimensional process such as that postulated for the squid axon by
Frankenhaeuser and Hodgkin, since the equation describing such a process, although
nonlinear, would have a generally exponential type solution, while the time course of
the process underlying Eaton's results is evidently sigmoidal.

The membrane phenomena underlying the increase in spike width are more difficult
to explain. Increased spike width due to the application of TEA has been associated
with an increase in the potassium activation time constant TXK (Fitzhugh, 1969). How-
ever, not enough is yet known to discuss this matter further.

Other than variations in waveshape, there are two main discrepancies between our
model and experimental observations. The first is that our function ZA(V) has a
maximum slope of magnitude 0.27, while the function S (V) has a maximum slope of
0.08 (see Table II). Experimental results (e.g., Connor and Stevens, 1971) indicate that
the functions SA and ZA should have maximum slopes which are similar in magnitude.
The second is that recent evidence (Smith et al., 1975) indicates that the regenerative
mechanism responsible for membrane oscillations is at least partially active in the
absence of internal potassium.

Both of these discrepancies may be accounted for by the assumption of a second
inward current term (Lux and Eckert, 1974). We will call this term gc and we will as-
sume that it contains an activation term whose time constant is of the same order as
TyA. In terms of our model, this would imply that Eq. 6 should be replaced by
V = (l/C)[(g,X3Y, + gT + gCXC)(VJ - V) + (g9KX + g AX4Y4 + gpXp)

. (VK - V) + gL(VL - V) + ICP + I.J,]

( 10)

together with the supplementary equation

X = [1/rXc(V)llSc(V) - xc].(11)

An analysis of the model I B, 3, 5, 10, 11, identical with that of the Appendix shows
that condition I is replaced by I':
gcSc(V1 - V) + IgA SA ZAI > + gK(S4)' + gA SA Z

(V - VK)AKA

+ (9T + 9CSc)(V - VK) + gL(VK - VL ) + (|p + /.Xt)

(V - VK)2

(I)

The physiological significance of replacing condition I with I' is evident. With gc = 0
as in Eq. 6, the potassium activation is required to provide all the regenerative effect

240

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

e 'N

/,,

4

N

'

v

NV-0

x

/I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
K

LXp

FiGURE 11

FIIGUE 12

Phase plane explanation of the lack of leading spikes in the model's bursts. Heavy
FIGURE 11
line denotes V -0 nullcline. Solid line, phase trajectory as in model. Dashed line, as presumed
to exist in the real cell. 0 denotes the cell threshold level.
FiGuRE 12
cycle.

Phase plane of the system 12 showing graphically the conditions required for a limit

of the slow wave, and hence must have a slope with a large magnitude. If Eq. 6 is re-
1, then the function Sc(V) augments the regenerative effect of ZA(V).
placed by 10,
This would permit ZA (V) to have a slope with a smaller magnitude, and would pro-
vide a regenerative effect in the absence of internal potassium.

The values of certain parameters of our model are not available from experimental
data at this time. It is hoped that this model will provide an impetus for experimenters
to attempt to measure these parameters, either directly or indirectly. Our work shows
that a model consisting of Eqs. I B, 3, 5, 6, with properly chosen parameters simulates
the behavior of the R15 cell. A model consisting of Eqs. 1 B, 3, 5, 10, 1 1, is shown to
predict experimental results not predicted by the simpler model. In addition to these
specific results, there are two results of a more general nature. The first is that activa-
tion and inactivation may exchange their respective roles of regeneration and degenera-
tion in Hodgkin-Huxley type models, and the second is that these models may couple
periodic voltage oscillations of different relative frequencies to produce oscillations
with complex waveshapes.

R. E. Plant would like to thank Dr. J. C. Dunn for many helpful discussions of the problem, and Doctors
L. Payne and S. Levin for obtaining partial support for this work under National Science Foundation Grant
GP-33031X. This work was also supported in part by NSF Grant GB-35498.
Receivedforpublication 16 Jaury 1975 and in revisedform 7 April1975.

APPENDIX

In this section we review the arguments presented in an earlier paper (Plant and Kim, 1975).
The problem is to find conditions which are sufficient for the system represented by Eqs. 1 B, 3,
5, 7, to have a periodic, oscillatory solution. Since this is a five-dimensional nonlinear system,
this problem cannot be solved directly. Rather, we must try to approximate system I B, 3, 5, 7

PLANT AND KIM Hodgkin-Huxley Modificationfor Bursting Pacemaker Neuron

241

by a two-dimensional system so that we may use the phase plane techniques of Poincafe to
analyze this approximate system.

In order to form an approximate system, we note that the variables XK, XA, and ,A have
time constants much less than that of Xp. We may therefore approximate system 1 B, 3,
5, 7 by multiplying the left-hand sides of the differential equations for kx', XA, and YA by a
parameter e, and letting t go to zero. We then make use of a theorem of Tikhonov (Tikhonov,
1950; Plant and Kim, 1975) which states that if a certain function, which we call the Tikhonov
function, is negative definite then the solution of the system 1 B, 3, 5, 7 will approach that of
the system
V = (l/C)gT(V - V) + [g1SK(K ) + gASA(V)ZA(V) + gPXPJ(VK - V)

+ gL( VL - V) + Iep + IntI 9

XA = (1l/rxp)[SpV) - XPK],
XK = SK(V), XA = SA(V), YA - ZA(V),
(12)
in a uniform asymptotic manner if we let e approach zero. In this system the Tikhonov func-
tion F is given by

F Z - (SK - XK) - (SA - XA)2 - (ZA - YA )

which is negative definite over the whole phase space. We are therefore justified in determining
the conditions for system 12 to have a stable limit cycle and expecting in this case that system
1 B, 3, 5, 7 will then also have a limit cycle.

Since the time constant of the V equation is much smaller than that of the Xp equation,
we may approach this problem through the theory of discontinuous oscillations (Andronov
et al., 1966), noting that the V term does not satisfy the condition of Tikhonov's theorem.
To make the system autonomous (i.e. having a right-hand side independent of time), we assume
that I,.t is a constant. According to this theory, the system 12 will have, for sufficiently large
values of Txp, a unique stable limit cycle if its nullclines have the geometry of those shown in
Fig. 12. In the phase plane of this system, the form of the Eqs. 12 determines everything but
the shape of the nullcline V - 0 near the equilibrium point (Plant and Kim, 1975). Therefore,
there are only two conditions in addition to those already given which must be satisfied.

(a) The slope of the equation Xp = G(V) obtained by solving V = 0 must have a nega-
tive slope for all V except those in a single interval VI < V < V2, in which G'(V) must be
positive.

(b) The curves Xp = S,(V) and Xp = G(V) must have a unique intersection, and it

must be in the region of positive G'( V). The equation for G( V) is given by
V = 0: Xp A G(V) = [1/g,( V - VK)J[gT(VI - V)

- [gKS(V) + g SA(V)ZA(V) (V - VK)
+ gL ( VL - V) + lop + Iext]

(13)
Noting that the signs of the derivative of the S and Z functions are uniformly positive and
negative, respectively, we see that condition (a) is satisfied if there is a unique interval VI <
V < V2 such that
Z 5X| > (gK /gA)(S4)' + St ZA

+ gT(VI

VK) + L(VK - VL) + IOP + IJt

(I)

gA ( V - VK)2

242

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

and condition (b) is satisfied if

G(V*) = SP(V*) for a unique V* such that VI < V* < V2.

(II)

Thus a sufficient condition for the system 12 to have a unique, stable limit cycle is that condi-
tions I and II be satisfied and that rzP be large enough for the discontinuous approximation
to be valid. If this is true, then for large r1p we may expect the fuli system I B, 3, 5, 7 to
have a periodic, oscillatory solution. We note that the existence of such an oscillatory solution
is not guaranteed, nor is it implied that conditions I and II are necessary for such a solution.
This is particularly true for system I B, 3, 5, 7 because the time constants of parameters XK,
XA, and YA vary among themselves by an order of magnitude (cf. Table III). Indeed, these
parameters have in the past been referred to as being respectively "fast" and "slow," it is
only with respect to Xp that they are all "relatively fast."

REFERENCES

ANDoNOV, A. A., A. A. Vfrr, and S. E. KHAKEN. 1966. Theory of Oscillators. (Engl. Transl.). Addi-

son-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass.

CARPNTER, D. 0. 1973. Ionic Mochanisms and Models of Endogenous Discharge of Aplysia Neurones

in Neurobiology of Invertebrates. J. Salanaki, editor. 35.

CONNOR, J. A., and C. F. STEVENs.

1971.

Prediction of repetitive firing behavior from voltage clamp

data on an isolated neurone soma. J. Physiol. 213:31.

COOKE, I. M., G. LEBLANc, and L. TAuc. 1974. Sodium pump stoichiometry in Aplysia neurones from

simultaneous current and tracer measurements.

Nature(Lond.). 251-254.

Potassium ion accumulation near a pace-making cell of Aplysia. J. Physiol. 224:421.
EATON, D. C. 1972.
FABER, D. S., and M. R. KL8E. 1972. Membrane characteristics of bursting pacenaker neurones in

FITZHUGH, R.

1969.

Mathematical models of excitation and propagation in nerve.

In Biological En-

FRANKENHAEUSBR, B., and A. L. HODGIKN. 1956. The after effects of impulses in the giant nerve fibers

FRAIER, W. T., E. R. KANDEL, J. KUPFBIMANN, R. WAZnIu, and R. E. COGGESHALL.

1967. Morpho-
logical and functional properties of identified neurons in the abdominal ganglion of Aplysia califomica.
J. Neurophysiol. 30:1288.

GOLA, M. 1974. Neurones I Ondes-Salves des moliusques. Pfluegers Arch. Eur. J. Physiol. 352:17.
HAMMING, R. W. 1973. Numerical Methods for Scientists and Engineers.

McGraw-Hill Book Com-

pany, New York. 2nd edition.

HODGICIN, A. L., and A. F. HuxLEY. 1952. A quantitative description of membrane current and its ap-

plication to conduction and excitation in nerve. J. Physiol. 117:500.

JUNGE, D., and M. BRODWICH, 1970.

Post-stimulus potassium conductance increase in Aplysia giant

Aplysia. Nat. NewBiol. 240:29.

gineering. H.P. Schwann, editor. 1.

ofLoglio. J. Physiol. 131:341

1973.

Cyclic variation of potassium conductance in a burst generating

neurones. Physiologist. 13:237.
JUNGE, D., and C. L. STEPHENS.

neurone in Aplysia. J. Physiol. 235:155.

250:574.

Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 49:787.

Lux, H. D., and R. ECKERT. 1974. Inferred slow inward current in snail neurons.

Nature (Land.).

MATHEU, P. A., and F. A. ROBERGE. 1971. Characteristics of pacemaker oscillations in Aplysia neurones.

MOORE, J. W., and F. RAMON, 1974. On numerical integration of the Hodgkin and Huxley equations

for a membrane action potential.

J. Theor. Biol. 45:249.

NARAHASHI, T., J. W. MooRE, and W. R. Scorr.

increa in lobster giant axons. J. Gen. Physiol. 47:965.

1964. Tetrodotoxin blockage of sodium conductance

NOBLE, D. 1962. A modification of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations applicable to Purkinje fiber action

PLANT, R. E., and M. KIM. 1975. On the mechanism underlying bursting in the Aplysia abdominal

and pacemaker potentials. J. Physiol. 160:317.

ganglion R5I cell. Math. Biosci. In press.

PLANT AND KIM Hodgkin-Huxley Modificationfor Bursting Pacemaker Neuron

243

SASTRE, A. 1974.

Analysis and Simulation of Pacemaker Neurons. Ph.D. Thesis.

Cornell University,

Ithaca, N.Y.

SMITH, T. G., J. L. BARKER, and H. GAINER. 1975. Requirements for bursting pacemaker potential activity

in mollerscan neurons. Nature (Lond.). 253:450.

STRUMWASSER, F.

1967. Types of information stored in single neutrons.

In Invertebrate Nervous Sys-

tems. C.A.G. Wiersma, editor. 291.

STRUMWASSER, F.

neurons.

STRUMWASSER, F.

1968. Membrane and intracellular mechanism governing endogenous activity

in
In Physiological and Biochemical Aspects ofNervous Integration. F. D. Carlson, editor. 329.
1973. Neural and humoral factors in temporal organization of behavior. Phvsiologist.

TIKHoNov, A. N. 1950. On systems of equations containing parameters. (In Russian). Mater. Sb. 27:147.
WACHTEL, H., and W. A. WILSON.

Voltage clamp analysis of rhythmic slow generation in burst-

1973.

ing neurones. In Neurobiology of Invertebrates. J. Salanki, editor. 59.

WiLSON, W. A., and H. Wachtel.

1974. Negative resistance characteristic essential for the maintenance

of slow oscillations in bursting neurons.

Science( Wash. D.C.). 186:932.

WINFREE, A. 1970. The temporal morphology of a biological clock. In Symposia on Math. Biol. 2nd and

16:9.

3rd, 109.

244

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 16

1976

