Domain model for Ca2+-inactivation of Ca2+ channels at low
channel density

Arthur Sherman,* Joel Keizer,* and John Rinzel*
*National Institutes of Health, National Institutes of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Mathematical Research
Branch, Bethesda, Maryland 20892; and tInstitute of Theoretical Dynamics and Department of Chemistry, University of
California, Davis, California 95616 USA

The "shell" model for Ca2+-inactivation of Ca2+ channels is based on the accumulation of Ca2+ in a macroscopic
ABSTRACT
shell beneath the plasma membrane. The shell is filled by Ca2+ entering through open channels, with the elevated Ca2+
concentration inactivating both open and closed channels at a rate determined by how fast the shell is filled. In cells with low
channel density, the high concentration Ca2+ "shell" degenerates into a collection of nonoverlapping "domains" localized
near open channels. These domains form rapidly when channels open and disappear rapidly when channels close. We use
this idea to develop a "domain" model for Ca2+-inactivation of Ca2+ channels. In this model the kinetics of formation of an
inactivated state resulting from Ca2+ binding to open channels determines the inactivation rate, a mechanism identical with
that which explains single-channel recordings on rabbit-mesenteric artery Ca2+ channels (Huang Y., J. M. Quayle, J. F.
Worley, N. B. Standen, and M. T. Nelson. 1989. Biophys. J. 56:1023-1028). We show that the model correctly predicts five
important features of the whole-cell Ca2+-inactivation for mouse pancreatic (-cells (Plants, T. D. 1988. J. Physiol.
404:731-747) and that Ca2+-inactivation has only minor effects on the bursting electrical activity of these cells.

1. INTRODUCTION

The inactivation of calcium channels by calcium ions has
been documented in a variety of cell types (Eckert and
Chad, 1984; Lux and Brown, 1984; Kalman et al., 1988).
Inactivation is generally observed after sudden depolariza-
tions from membrane potentials at or near the resting
potential to potentials near 0 mV and is manifested as a
slow decline in the magnitude of the calcium current
following a rapid increase. When barium is substituted
for calcium as the current-carrying ion, inactivation is
greatly reduced, from which it is concluded that Ca2+ ions
are specifically involved in the inactivation process. Be-
cause Ca2+ ions bind tightly to proteins, it is commonly
assumed that Ca2' binding to the channels is responsible
for inactivation, with recent evidence suggesting that
binding occurs at the inner face of the membrane (Huang
et al., 1989). A number of other inactivation mechanisms
for Ca2, channels have been proposed, including phos-
phorylation and participation of second messengers (Arm-
strong and Eckert, 1987; Armstrong and Kalman, 1988),
and direct inactivation by voltage (Satin and Cook,
1989). Whereas these processes may well be important in
many cells on longer time scales, we focus here exclusively
on inactivation associated with the direct binding of Ca2,
at the inner face of the membrane in cells with low
channel density.

Several mechanisms that involve internal calcium bind-
ing to channels have been proposed to explain the time

Address correspondence to Dr. Arthur Sherman.

course of the inactivation (Standen and Stanfield, 1982;
Chad and Eckert, 1984). These mechanisms do not
generally distinguish between the effects of Ca2+ ions
binding to open or closed channels, and they assume that
calcium binding to, and consequent blocking of, the
channel are rapid with respect to accumulation of calcium
near the inner face of the membrane (Chad et al., 1984).
The region in which calcium accumulates near the mem-
brane is thought of as a thin "shell" or compartment,
whose volume is a small, but not negligible, fraction of the
cell volume (Fig. 1). In the shell model slow Ca2,-inacti-
vation of the calcium current is achieved as a consequence
of the long time required to increase the calcium concen-
tration within the shell. With suitable adjustment of
parameters, such as the rate constant for loss of Ca2+ and
the volume of the shell, it has been possible to fit this
model to experimental data taken from Aplysia neurons
(Chad and Eckert, 1984; Chad et al., 1984) and insect
skeletal muscle (Ashcroft and Stanfield, 1982).

The idea of a shell of elevated Ca2, ion concentration
near the membrane is a natural consequence of the
localization of calcium channels within the plasma mem-
brane. Although present experimental techniques only
allow resolution of space and time averaged Ca2+ concen-
trations directly under the membrane (Hernandez-Cruz
et al., 1990), numerical simulation of the concentration
profile of Ca2+ ions emanating from an open calcium
channel (Simon and Llinas, 1985) shows a clear domain
structure localized within a few tenths of a micron of the

Volume 58

October 1990

985-995

985-995

Biophysical Journal

Biophysical Journal

985
985

inner mouth of the channel. Within such a domain there is
an enormous gradient of Ca2+ ion concentration, which
for physiological conditions ranges from the order of 0.5
mM near the inner mouth of 10 ,uM at a radius of a few
hundredths of a micron (Simon and Llinas, 1985). These
calculations also show that high Ca2, ion concentrations
at the inner mouth of the channel develop within a few
microseconds after the channel opens and disappear on a
similar time scale when the channel closes. For mem-
branes containing densities of open channels in excess of
50-100 umM-2, a region of thickness the order of a micron
would be formed from the overlap of these localized
calcium domains. In this way both open and closed
channels at the inner face of the membrane would be
subjected to elevated Ca2, ion concentrations, providing
justification for the notion of a calcium "shell."

For cells with low channel density the idea of a "shell"
is not appropriate, and an alternative mechanism for
Ca2+-inactivation is needed. A compelling example is the
pancreatic ,B-cell, reported by Plant (1988) to exhibit
Ca2+-inactivation, in which we estimate, using whole-cell
currents, a uniform calcium-channel density of -0.5
,Um-2. From the open-channel probability reported by
Rorsman and Trube (1986), we conclude that the density
of open channels is <0.05 um-2 under physiological
conditions. Even if the Ca2+ channels are clustered in
"hot spots," for which there is some evidence (Rorsman et
al., 1988), the local density of open channels is no greater
than 2-3 ,um2. Such densities are much too small for the
local domains under the open channels to overlap and
form a shell of elevated calcium concentration under-
neath the plasma membrane.

Indeed, the appropriate physical picture for the f-cell
seems to be a collection of independent calcium channels.
Such a picture is reinforced by the work of Lux and
Brown (1984) who discovered that whole-cell inactivation
of Ca2+ currents could be obtained by superimposing an
ensemble of single-channel recordings. In this case re-
gions of high calcium will be localized in "domains"
around open channels only (Fig. 1). These domains attain
extremely high, quasisteady concentrations of calcium
(- 1 mM) at the inner mouth of the channel within a few
microseconds after opening and disappear within a few
microseconds after the channel closes. Thus, for the
pancreatic A-cell, and other cells with a low surface
density of calcium channels, such as rat clonal pituitary
cells (Hagiwara and Ohmori, 1983) and bovine chro-
maffin cells (Fenwick et al., 1982), one expects the effect
of elevated calcium near the inner face of the plasma
membrane to be felt only by the open channels.

Because at low channel densities there is no "shell" to
be filled, there must be other factors that determine the
rate of Ca2+-inactivation. For inactivation with time

scales in the range 10-100 ms, one can exclude mecha-
nisms based solely on bulk cytosolic Ca2 , which is at a
concentration three to four orders of magnitude lower
than in the "domains," and which changes relatively
slowly. For example, in fl-cells there is theoretical and
experimental evidence that cytosolic Ca2+ oscillates on a
time scale of seconds (Perez-Armendariz and Atwater,
1986) and minutes (Grapengiesser et al., 1988). Again we
are led to the idea that inactivation is due to domain
calcium. However, because the formation of localized
calcium domains occurs on the microsecond time scale, it
is not possible to relate the time scale of inactivation to the
time required for domains to be formed. We, therefore,
consider which processes are responsible for the time
course of inactivation in cells with low channel densities.
In their pioneering work on Ca2+-inactivation, Chad and
Eckert (1984) suggested that a slow step in "'the calcium-
dependent process" might be the culprit, although they
did not pursue this idea. If we accept that Ca2' binding to
the channel is involved in inactivation, then the logical
calcium-dependent process to consider is the inactivation
step, itself, that occurs when a Ca2+ ion binds to a site on
the channel. The rate-limiting step could be either bind-
ing itself or a conformational change that blocks the
channel following binding (Huang et al., 1989).

In the remainder of this paper we develop a simple
domain mechanism for explaining the Ca2+-inactivation
of calcium channels in cells with low channel densities.
The mechanism involves the binding of a single Ca2+ ion
to an open channel, where the concentration of Ca2+
under the channel mouth may be in the millimolar range.
The time course of Ca2, current is determined by the
kinetics of the opening, closing, and Ca2+-blockage of the
channels. In section II we derive the equations and show
that the domain mechanism provides a simple, quantita-
tive explanation of the U-shaped Ca2+-inactivation curves,
h, as a function of membrane potential, V, that are
obtained in the standard two-pulse experimental measure-
ments of Ca2+-inactivation. In addition, we find that the
characteristic time for inactivation to occur, TB( V), is
roughly proportional to the Ca2+-inactivation function,
h(V). This implies that TB(V) decreases and then in-
creases as the membrane potential is increased from the
resting potential, as has been noted experimentally (Plant,
1988). We also show that in such a model, inactivation
gives the appearance of being a function of total calcium
entry into the cell, in spite of the fact that average
cytosolic calcium is not the agent of inactivation. We,
thus, show that the experimental observation of the
foregoing features does not necessarily imply a "shell"
model, although this has often been tacitly assumed in the
literature.

We compare our results with recent whole-cell

986
986

Biophysical Journal
Biophysical Journal

Volume 58
Volume 58

October 1990

October 1990

voltage-clamp experiments by Plant (1988) on the
Ca2+-inactivation of calcium channels in cultured mouse
pancreatic fl-cells (Rorsman et al., 1988; Keahey et al.,
1989) and find good agreement with experiment. These
cells exhibit bursting electrical activity with a period of
tens of seconds, which is thought to be regulated by a slow
process. Using numerical simulation of a model (Chay
and Keizer, 1983; Sherman et al., 1988), we demonstrate
that Ca2+-inactivation of the Ca2, channels over hun-
dreds of milliseconds is compatible with a bursting
mechanism based on the build-up and removal of macro-
scopic cytosolic Ca2 . We find that whereas inactivation
modifies the spikes, it is not capable by itself of producing
bursts. In our concluding section, we note that our
inactivation mechanism is identical to that which Huang
et al. (1989) used to explain recent single-channel record-
ings on Ca2+-inactivation in smooth muscle, and that our
conclusions are compatible with patch clamp measure-
ments by Lux and Brown (1984) on Helix cells.

II. DERIVATION OF THE MODEL AND
QUALITATIVE PROPERTIES

Experimentally one can quantify steady-state inactiva-
tion using a two-pulse protocol in which the ratio of the
peak calcium current attained after a voltage clamp
prepulse to that attained in the absence of a prepulse is
calculated. We follow customary usage and define the
inactivation, h, independently of experimental procedure
as the fraction of channels which at any moment are not
inactivated. We will derive several properties of this
theoretical h and show that the experimental definitions
reduce to it in limiting cases.

One of several experimental results that our model will
account for is the U-shaped dependence of h on the pulse
potential, Vp. That is, h first decreases then increases with
depolarization, generally with a minimum near the mini-
mum of the whole-cell calcium current (Plant, 1988). In
the case of the pancreatic fl-cell Plant further observes
that the time constant of inactivation, here denoted TB, iS
also U-shaped, with a minimum -20 mV. Chad and
Eckert (1984) report and model similar behavior in
Aplysia.

Our model is based on the following assumptions: (a)
There are small localized domains of high Ca2+ concentra-
tion (n 1 mM) immediately under the inner mouths of
open channels. Domains are established instantaneously
(in microseconds) relative to the time scale of channel
activation and inactivation kinetics and vanish instanta-
neously when the channel closes (Simon and Llinas,
1985). (b) Inactivation results from the binding of do-
main Ca2, (Cad) to open channels, and the time scale of

inactivation is determined by the kinetics of Ca2' binding
to and blocking the channel. This differs from previous
models for Ca2+-inactivation (Standen and Stanfield,
1982; Chad and Eckert, 1984), which assume that Ca2+
binding to the channels is instantaneous and that the time
scale of inactivation is due to the rate of filling of a
submembrane compartment or "shell" (Fig. 1). Note that
we implicitly assume that the dissociation constant of the
chennels for Ca2+ is sufficiently high that binding to
closed channels, which see the bulk cytosolic Ca2, concen-
tration, is negligible. (c) The time constant of inactivation
(tens of milliseconds) is much slower than that of activa-
tion (- 1 ms). (d) Channel density is sufficiently low that
domains of different channels do not overlap.

Thus, our kinetic mechanism is

a

C

0 + Ca

i,

k+

where the states represent closed (C), open (0), and
inactivated or blocked (B), and Ca is domain calcium.
Although one can easily imagine more elaborate kinetic
schemes that include more channel states, this scheme has
recently been shown to suffice in analyzing the kinetics of
single Ca2+ channel recordings from rabbit artery muscle
(Huang et al., 1989). The second step in this kinetic
scheme represents blocking of the calcium channel by
binding of a calcium ion at the inner face of the channel.
It could correspond to (a) a true bimolecular binding
kinetics resulting in a bound state that blocks the channel
or (b) the net effect of rapidly equilibrating, nonsaturat-
ing binding of calcium to the channel, followed by a slow
conformational change to the blocked state. In the latter
case k+ = kf/Kdi,, where kf is the rate constant for the
conformation change, and Kdi, is the dissociation con-

Doma0n

Shell

Rapid Filing
Slow Binding/Blocking
Open Channels Inactivate

Slow Filling
Rapid Binding/Blocking
All Channelsinactivate

In cells with low channel density high Ca2" will be found
FIGURE 1
only in the domains underneath the inner mouths of open channels. In
cells with high density domains may overlap to form a continuous
submembrane compartment "shell" of elevated Ca2+.

Sherman et al.
n
an eLa.

Domai
Domain Model for Calcium Inactivation

Cli

I

t

987

stant. In either case, the small net transition rate from 0
to B gives rise to the slow inactivation of the channel.

The equations for this process are:

dt = -a(V)C + OM(V)O

dt

dB
dt

= -k_B + k+Cad(V)O

O= 1-B- C.

(la)

(lb)
(Ic)

The differential equations, Eq. 1 a and b, are coupled
through the algebraic conservation law, Eq. 1
c. The
variables C, 0, and B represent the fraction of channels in
the closed, open, and inactivated (blocked) states, respec-
tively. The quantity Cad represents the average Ca2+
concentration in a domain localized around the inner
mouth of an open channel. According to simulations of
three-dimensional diffusion with constant calcium flux
through a channel (Simon and Llina's, 1985), the domain
Ca2, concentration close to the channel reaches a steady-
state in microseconds. We, therefore, take Cad to be
instantaneously proportional to the steady-state flux at
the mouth of a single channel. Indeed, using the diffusion
equation with a source at the channel and modeling
buffering as a reduction in the effective diffusion coeffi-
cent (Fogelson and Zucker, 1985) in the cytosol it is easy
to show that the steady-state concentration is proportional
to the current. Thus, we make the further assumption that

Cad(V) = Ai(V),

(ld)

where A converts the units from current to concentration
and is negative because an inward flux of positive ions is a
negative current. The magnitude of A can be changed
experimentally. It can be decreased by adding mobile
buffers like EGTA or BAPTA. Similarly, it is possible to
swamp the contribution of the open-channel current to
Cad as given in Eq. 1 d by use of concentrated Ca2+
solutions in perfused whole-cell or excised patches. In
these ways the rate of inactivation by domain Ca2+ can be
manipulated experimentally. As a final caveat on this
assumption, we note that Eq. 1 d breaks down at the
reversal potential where i(V) changes sign and the small
sm) background Ca2+ concentration in the cytosol
(:0. 1
becomes significant. A more detailed model would be
required in that situation.

The fraction of channels not inactivated is h = 1 - B.
Its steady-state value, he,, can be found by setting the left
hand sides of Eqs. 1 equal to zero, which gives

h,,(V) = 1 - B_(V) =

k+ *m

kiniv

(2)

Here m., is the fraction of noninactivated channels which

98
988

Biophysical Journal

are open at steady-state,

m,,(V)

a(V)

a(V) + fl(V)

O,(V)

O,,(V) + C,(V)'

(3)

Eq. 2 can be verified using Eq. 3 and noting that at
equilibrium

k+ AiV
k Ai(V) =

BL(V)
)

Inspecting Eq. 2 we find h,, must approach one at very
negative voltages because m,, goes to zero, and that it
must approach one near the Ca2+ reversal potential
because i(V) is zero there. Furthermore, because m.,
increases with Vand the magnitude of i decreases with V,
h. is U-shaped with a single minimum. We have plotted
h. in Fig. 2 a using parameters appropriate for the d-cell.
From Eq. 2 we can also see that he, decreases (i.e., there is
more inactivation) as the external Ca2+ concentration
increases because the flux through the channel increases.
This is consistent with the fact that Rorsman and Trube
(1986) observed less inactivation in pancreatic A-cells
using 2.5 mM Ca. than did Plant (1988) using 10 mM
Cao.

60

.-I

I30

1.0

0.5

0-

I-c;.!

--125

-80 -40

40

80

V (mV)

(a) (Solid, left scale) Steady-state inactivation, h_, (Eq. 2).
FIGURE 2
(Dashed, right scale) The time constant of inactivation, TB, plotted
against prepulse potential, Vp. The circles represent values of h calcu-
lated from the two-pulse protocol in Fig. 3. (b) Theoretical peak Ca2"
current (Eq. 10) plotted against prepulse potential. Note that h and ICa
have minima at the same voltage. TB is approximately proportional to h
as predicted by the fast activation theory (Eq. 8) except at negative
voltages.

Volume 58

8 Otbr19

October 1990

Eq. 2 is an exact steady-state solution of Eqs. 1 a-c for
any set of initial conditions. Eqs. 1 are linear with
constant coefficients for fixed V and all time-dependent
solutions can be obtained explicitly. To simplify this we
consider first the special case of a single voltage step from
a holding potential, Vb, where the Ca2+ current is essen-
tially zero to a pulse potential,
Vp, and exploit our
assumption that the "activation" step in our kinetic
scheme is much faster than "inactivation." According to
Eqs. 1 a and b, this implies that

k_ + k+Ai(V)

1

Under this assumption, the processes of activation and
inactivation can be approximately separated in time and
there will be two well-separated time constants, a fast one
for activation (Tm) and a slow one (TB) for inactivation.

In typical whole-cell, one-pulse experiments the hold-
ing potential is very negative and all the channels are in
the closed state. Therefore, initially C = 1 and 0 = B =
0. When the voltage is stepped to a more positive potential
(Vp), 0 and C rapidly go to a quasisteady state, with 0
rising exponentially from 0 to m,, (Vp) with time constant

Tm(vp)

I

a(vp) + #(VP) ,

(5)

When Eq. 4 holds, we can treat this rise as instantaneous,
with B remaining near zero. Inactivation then slowly
increases while the ratio of 0 to C remains fixed:

0

C

a(Vp)
l(Vp)

(6)

Substituting this into Eqs. 1 b and c we get a simplified
equation for B during the inactivation phase:

dB
dt = k Ai(Vp)mc(Vp) - [k + k+Ai(Vp)mx(Vp)]B.

Thus, in the limit of fast activation/slow inactivation, B
rises exponentially from 0 to a steady-state value, denoted
Bo (Vp), with time constant

rB(VP) = k

k+Ai(Vp)m:O(Vp)

(7)

The fraction of open channels, 0, falls from m. (Vp) to its
steady-state value, 0, (Vp), with the same time constant,

TB.

Comparing Eq. 2 to Eq. 7 we have the remarkable

result that

h-(Vp) = k-TB(Vp).

(8)
This means that TB iS U-shaped, and in fact has the same
shape as h., provided k_ is voltage independent and Eq. 4
holds. In Fig. 2 a we have plotted h., and TB against Vp

using parameter values appropriate for mouse beta cells
as described in the Appendix. The curve for TB is not
strictly a multiple of h. because for the beta cell Eq. 4 is
only approximately true at sufficiently negative poten-
tials.

Note that the expression in Eq. 7 is not simply the time
constant that Eq. 1 b would have if it were uncoupled to
Eq. 1 a, but has an additional factor m, (VP). This can
also be obtained from the analytic solution of Eqs. 1 by
expanding the eigenvalues in powers of the left-hand side
of Eq. 4.

The whole-cell calcium current is computed by multi-
plying the single-channel current by the total number of
Ca2+ channels, NCa, and the fraction which are open, 0,
i.e.,

ICa(t) = NcaO(t)i(V).

(9)
In the limit of fast activation the peak Ca2+ current
during a single pulse from rest to Vis

7Ca(V) = Ncam-(V)i(V)9

(10)
and we can use Eqs. 2 and 10 to express h., in terms of the
peak current,

1 + A7a()(11)

(I 1)

where A is independent of V. Differentiating Eq. 11 we
find that, not only does h., inherit the U-shaped functional
dependence of 'Ca on V, but that the two curves have a
minimum at the same voltage (Fig 2, a and b).

This relationship between h., and Ic. is striking because
total Ca2+ current plays no explicit role in the model, but
it can be understood as follows. Eq. 2 implies that
(1 - h)/h,h is proportional to m,,(V)i(V). Multiplying
through by h., shows that the equilibrium fraction of
channels inactivated, B,.,, is proportional to 0Q(V)i(V); it
is proportional to i because we assume that domain
calcium is proportional to i, and it is proportional to 0,,
because we assume that calcium acts on open channels.

The quantity h.,

is usually measured indirectly by
two-pulse experiments. In these experiments (Plant, 1988)
voltage is stepped from the holding potential, Vh, to a
series of prepulse potentials, Vp, for a time tp. The voltage
is then stepped back down to Vh for a gap-time tg, and
finally stepped up to a test potential, Vt as shown in Fig. 3.
The inactivation function, h, is defined as the ratio of the
peak calcium current attained during the second pulse to
Vt after a prepulse of duration tp to that attained in the
absence of a prepulse. Equivalently,

h( Vp) =

peak ICa( VP)
=peak Ica( Vh)

(12)

The actual values obtained for h depend somewhat on Vt,

Sherman et al.
Sherman et al.

Domain Model for Calcium Inactivation
Domain Model for Calcium Inactivation

989

989

mula (Goldman, 1943; Hodgkin and Katz, 1949). The
values of k+A = 0.028 pA-1 ms- and k_ = 0.018 ms-'
(see Appendix) were determined to match Plant's whole-
cell currents. Using the computations of Simon and Llinas
(1985) to estimate a value of Cad = 0.35 mM for the
domain Ca2+ concentration implies that k+ = 0.036
mM-'ms-' for the /-cell, about an order of magnitude
smaller than the values obtained from single-channels
measurements in rabbit mesenteric arteries by Huang et
al. (1989). The effective dissociation constant in our
mechanism, Kd = k_/k, is on the order of 0.5 mM, i.e.,
comparable to the estimated domain Ca2+ concentration.
This is about two orders of magnitude larger than has
been invoked in the usual "shell" models (Chad and
Eckert, 1984). If the Kd is this large, and channel density
is sufficiently low that there is no "shell," then closed
channels will make no significant contribution to inactiva-
tion, whether or not their Ca2' binding properties inher-
ently differ from those of open channels.

Whole-cell peak calcium currents (ICa), the inactiva-
tion (h) and inactivation time constant (rB) using the
fast-activation/slow-inactivation approximation in Eqs.
2, 7, and 10 are shown in Fig. 2. The results are in good
quantitative agreement with Plant's experimental mea-
surements. Whereas Plant does not provide numerical
data for the dependence of rB on the potential, he does
note that the rate of inactivation increases as the voltage
is stepped up to -20 mV only to decrease at larger
depolarizations. The fact that the minimum of h. as
measured by Plant occurs at a slightly higher voltage than
the minimum of ICa could be incorporated into our model
by having k+ decrease with an exponential Boltzmann
factor, although we neglect this refinement in the interest
of simplicity.

Plant observed that when the external Ca2+ is increased
from 1 to 10 mM at a fixed potential of -10 mV, the peak
whole-cell currents, 'Ca, are unchanged, but the rate and
extent of inactivation increase (Plant, 1988, Fig. 2). As
Plant notes, the "shell" model incorrectly predicts that
the inactivation rate and extent should be the same. As it
stands our domain model makes the same incorrect
prediction (see Eqs. 8 and 11). If we postulate, however,
that more than one calcium is needed to bind to a channel
to block it, additional factors of the single-channel cur-
rent, i(V), would appear in the denominators of Eqs. 7
and 11. Because increasing external Ca2, increases i(V),
both h. and the inactivation time constant would de-
crease, as found experimentally, even though ICa remains
constant.

VP

Vt

50

-40

-70'

°l 1 ----------

-70

Vh
---d

t (mis)

Simulated voltage-clamp Ca2" currents for two-pulse proto-
FIGURE 3
col. Membrane potential is stepped from the holding potential, Vh =
-70 mV, to the prepulse potential, Vp, for 200 ms. Vp, is varied from
- 40 to + 50 mV in steps of 10 mV (voltage protocol at top). Voltage is
then stepped back to the holding potential, Vh = -70 mV, for a gap of
10 ms, and finally stepped to the test potential, V, = 0 mV. Current
records for prepulses to (a) -40, -30, -20, and -10 mV, (b) 0.10,
..., 50 mV. Tail currents are clipped at -125, pA for display purposes.
Compare with Plant (1988) Fig. 1 A.

tp, and tg. In the limit of fast activation, long prepulse
duration, and no gap, peak ICa(Vp) is proportional to
m,(V,)h,(Vp), because the activation instantaneously
adjusts to the test potential while inactivation remains at
the value it had at the end of the prepulse. On the other
hand, peak Ica(Vh) is proportional to m,(V,)h,,(Vh).
Because h,(Vh) z
1, the ratio would indeed yield h,,(Vp).

III. APPLICATION TO THE PANCREATIC
:-CELL

We now specialize our model to account for the experi-
ments of Plant (1988) on mouse pancreatic 3-cells, which
show inactivation of Ca2+ channels. Although there is
some evidence for two Ca2+ channels in rat /-cells
(Hiriart and Matteson, 1988; Satin and Cook, 1985), rat
insulinoma RINm5f 3-cells (Velasco, 1988), and HIT
cells (Satin and Cook, 1988; but see also Keahey et al.,
1988), Plant (1988) and Rorsman et al. (1988) conclude
that in mouse d-cells there is only one type of Ca2+-
inactivating Ca2, channel. To compare with Plant's
experiments on the /3-cell, values of the activation-rate
constants a and /3 were taken from the experiments of
Rorsman and Trube (1986). Single-channel currents
were calculated from the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz for-

The result of our simulated two-pulse experiments,
obtained by integrating Eqs. 1 a-c numerically, are
displayed in Figs. 3 a and b and agree well with two-pulse
current measurements (see Plant, 1988; Figs. 1 A and
3 A). The decline of the Ca2+ current becomes steeper

990
990

Biophysical Journal
Biophysical Journal

Volume 58
Volume 58

October 1990
October 1990

and faster as the prepulse voltage, Vp, is increased from
-40 to - 1O mV (Fig. 3 a) and becomes shallower and
slower as Vp is increased further from 0 to 50 mV
(Fig. 3 b). The dependence of the inactivation, h, based
on these simulations and Eq. 12 is shown as circles in
Fig. 2 a. Note that these agree rather well with the
approximate values predicted for the case of fast-
activation/slow-inactivation. Most of the discrepancy is
the result of redistribution of channel states during the
gap. In particular, gap effects are responsible for the
failure of h to return to one as Vp approaches the Ca2+
reversal potential, a phenomenon which was reported by
Ashcroft and Stanfield (1982) in stick insect muscle.

Another way to test our model is to plot the two-pulse
inactivation, h, against total Ca2+ entry during the
prepulse (Plant, 1988, Fig. 4). For the A-cell, Plant found
that inactivation appears to be a function only of Ca2+
entry, which could be fit by an exponential plus a
constant. The dependence of the Ca2+ inactivation on the
total calcium entry, CaClt),, at a fixed membrane potential
has been used as an indication that accumulation of
calcium in a shell is responsible for inactivation of
calcium channels. What is interesting is that, in the limit
of very fast activation, a similar result holds for our
domain model.

This can be seen in the following way. To obtain the
total Ca2+ entry we integrate the instantaneous Ca2+
current (Eq. 9)

Caentry = [NCai(V)/2F] f00(t) dt

(13)

with F Faraday's constant. In the limit of fast activation
O decreases exponentially with time constant TB during
the prepulse from a maximum of m.,(V) to a steady-state
value m, (V)h.(V) and Eq. 13 implies that

NCa[l - h.(V)]

=nr

2Fk+A
. {[1

h-(V)][1 - ek 1p/hJ(V)] + k tp1.

(14)

This equation shows that Caentr,y is a function of h. for any
fixed value of tp because all the voltage dependence is in
h.. Whereas this would not be strictly true if k+ or k_
were voltage-dependent, it would be approximately true if
the voltage-dependence were weak. Inverting Eq. 14 gives
h. as a function of Caentry, If tp is made large, the second
term dominates and the dependence on h., becomes
approximately linear, not exponential as found by Plant
(1988). Nonetheless, we think it noteworthy that an
exact, monotonically decreasing relationship exists be-
tween inactivation and the integral of total Ca2+ current
in our model even though it is single-channel current
which determines inactivation. Clearly a correspondence
between h and Ca2+ cannot be taken as diagnostic of

inactivation due to filling of a submembrane "shell" as
some authors have assumed.

These results satisfy us that a simple domain model can
account for the voltage-clamp measurements of Plant
(1988) on pancreatic ,-cells, namely: (a) the U-shaped
inactivation curve; (b) the U-shaped dependence of the
inactivation time constant on voltage; (c) the anomalous
increase in the inactivation rate at -10 mV when external
Ca2, is raised from 1 to 10 mM; (d) the dependence of
inactivation on total Ca2+ influx during the prepulse; and
(e) the time course of whole-cell Ca2+ current measure-
ments. We have also confirmed that the fast-activation/
slow-inactivation theory of section II is a good approxima-
tion to the behavior of the complete model.

Beta cells in pancreatic islets undergo electrical burst-
ing when exposed to stimulatory amounts of glucose
(Atwater et al., 1989) and Plant (1988) has speculated
that Ca2+-inactivation might have a role in bursting.
Indeed, before Plant's work Chay and colleagues (Chay,
1987; Chay and Kang, 1987, 1988) proposed models in
which Ca2+-inactivation is an essential ingredient in the
bursing mechanism. We have investigated this possibility
by incorporating our domain model, fit as described above
to Plant's and Rorsman and Trube's data, into a recent
version of the Chay-Keizer bursting model (Sherman et
al., 1988). That model employs three ionic currents, the
voltage-gated, delayed-rectifying, K+ current (IK), the
voltage-gated Ca2, current ('Ca), and the calcium-
activated K+ current (K-Ca) in the total current balance
equation,

dV

CmI =-IK-ICa-IKCa(

(15)

The only significant changes from Sherman et al. (1988)
are in the form of the Ca2+ current. Here we include the
effect of inactivation, which has a similar time scale to K+
activation, by solving Eqs. 1 a-c to determine the open
fraction, 0, as a function of time and obtain the current
from Eq. 9. In addition, the activation curves have been
shifted to the right to account for the screening caused by
high external Ca2+ (Frankenhaeuser and Hodgkin, 1957).
Further discussion of the derivation and properties of the
family of models to which this one belongs can be found in
Chay and Keizer (1983) and Rinzel (1985).

Fig. 4 shows bursing solutions obtained with the model.
The unusually large spike amplitude (Fig. 4 a) is due to
the high levels of Cao (10 mM), and is qualitatively what
one expects based on experiment (Ribalet and Beigelman,
1980; Atwater et al., 1980). More typical bursts are
obtained with Cao = 2.5 mM and activation parameters
shifted back to account for the reduced Ca2+ screening
effect (not shown). The onset and termination of bursts is
regulated by oscillations in average cytosolic calcium,
shown in Fig. 4 b. When the decrease of calcium during

Sherman et al.
Sherman et al.

Domain Model for Calcium Inactivation
Domain Model for Calcium Inactivation

991

991

spikes. We emphasize that the results do not rest on the
use of the K-Ca channel; Ca2' activation of K-ATP
channels in addition to or instead of the K-Ca channel
(Keizer and Magnus, 1989) or even slow voltage-
dependent inactivation of the Ca2, channels would work
as well. We conclude that Ca2+-induced inactivation of
Ca2, channels plays only a secondary role in the bursting
activity of the ,B-cell.

IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Our model of Ca2+ inactivation of calcium channels is
based on the calcium domain that has been predicted
theoretically to form near the inner mouth of an open
calcium channel a few microseconds after the channel
opens. The calcium concentration at the inner mouth of
an open channel is almost instantaneously fixed by the
single-channel current, i(V), and, therefore, depends on
the membrane potential. We assume that domain Ca2 ,
Cad, is proportional to i(V), and assume that inactivation
is a result of the binding of calcium to open channels. If
the rate-limiting step in inactivation is binding, the
kinetic rate of inactivation by calcium is directly propor-
tional to Cad. If the rate-limiting step is a subsequent
conformational change, the kinetic rate is proportional to
the number of bound channels, and if the dissociation
constant for the binding step is large, the rate is again
proportional to Cad. In either case, the transition rate to
the inactivated state is proportional to i(V). The activa-
tion rate of calcium channels from their closed state, on
the other hand, is determined by the intrinsic voltage-
dependent rate at which closed and open channels inter-
convert, which is generally more rapid than the inactiva-
tion. This mechanism is a departure from previous "shell"
models for Ca2, inactivation (Standen and Stanfield,
1982; Chad and Eckert, 1984) which are based on
accumulation of Ca2+ in a macroscopic submembrane
compartment (Fig. 1). Shell models assume that Ca2+
binds rapidly to both open and closed channels and that
the rate-limiting step in inactivation is the time for the
shell Ca2+ concentration to increase. Our domain mecha-
nism is appropriate for membranes with low densities of
open calcium channels (less than a few per square
micron) in which local calcium domains around open
channels do not overlap to form a true shell underneath
the membrane. For such membranes, closed channels are
not subjected to significantly elevated calcium concentra-
tions and are not involved in the Ca2+ inactivation
process.

The domain mechanism of inactivation has several
interesting kinetic features, derived in section II, in the
limit that the activation rate is much faster than the

,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1.0 -

0.7

0.3 7

0.0

F-

0

i

t (s)

FIGURE 4. Time courses of bursting electrical activity in the presence
of glucose are obtained by numerical solution of the equations of
Sherman et al. (1988) as modified in the text, and with 10 mM external
Ca2" (see Appendix). (a) Membrane potential, V. (b) Free intracellular
Ca2', Cai. The slow oscillations of Cai trigger the onset and termination
of bursting by activating K-Ca channels. (c) The instantaneous fraction
of Ca2" channels inactivated, B.

the silent phase reduces the K-Ca conductance to a
critical minimum value, the membrane depolarizes, trig-
gering the voltage-gated Ca2' and delayed rectifying K+
channels and initiating rapid oscillations. The spikes
bring Ca2+ into the cell which raises the K-Ca conduc-
tance to a critical maximum value and terminates the
burst. Fig. 4 c shows the instantaneous fraction of Ca2,
channels which are inactivated (B). This quantity oscil-
lates rapidly, following the membrane potential changes
through Eqs. 1 rather than the slow changes in average
cytosolic Ca2+ concentration.

Thus, our model for inactivation of Ca2+ channels by
domain Ca2+ can be incorporated into the paradigm of
bursting based on slow Ca2+ feedback into K-Ca chan-
nels. The differences caused by inactivation are small
quantitatively, and reside primarily in the form of the

992
992

Biophysical Journal
Biophysical Journal

Volume

Volume 58

October 1990

inactivation due to calcium. First, the steady-state Ca2+
inactivation, hm (V), is a U-shaped function of the mem-
brane potential. Second, Ca2+ inactivation occurs as a
single exponential with a characteristic time, rB(V),
which as a function of membrane potential is also
U-shaped and is proportional to the inactivation curve.
These two features hold approximately even when activa-
tion is simply faster, but not infintely faster, than the Ca2+
inactivation, as judged by our numerical simulations of
the standard two-pulse experimental measurements of the
inactivation. If one assumes that only a single Ca2+ ion is
required to bind to a channel to inactivate, then one gets
the stronger result that h. and 7Ca are functionally related
by Eq. 11. In particular, the minimum of h. is located
where the magnitude of peak calcium current, Ica(V), is
maximum.

For the pancreatic (3-cell the domain model predicts the
major experimental features of whole-cell Ca2+-inactiva-
tion (Plant, 1988). We believe it to be a more plausible
description of calcium inactivation than the shell model
because of the low density of calcium channels in these
cells. Although a number of investigators (Plant, 1988;
Chay, 1987; Chay and Kang, 1987, 1988; Satin and
Cook, 1989) have speculated that Ca2+-inactivation may
play an important role in the bursting electrical activity of
the pancreatic $-cell, we find that if inactivation is
modeled as due to domain Ca2+ in a manner consistent
with Plant's voltage-clamp data, then its effect on burst-
ing is slight. Indeed, examining the calculations of burst-
ing in Fig. 4 c, one sees that the fraction of inactivated
channels follows the rapid changes in membrane potential
rather than the slow changes in internal calcium. This is a
consequence of the fact that in the domain model calcium
acts only on open channels with a rate that is dependent
on the open-channel current at a given potential.

Recently it has been possible to explore mechanistic
features of Ca2+-inactivation using patch clamp measure-
ments on single calcium channels (Lux and Brown, 1984;
Rosenberg et al., 1988). The work of Lux and Brown, in
particular, provides further evidence for our domain
model. Using a whole-cell arrangement, these authors
showed that the time course of whole-cell inactivation
could be obtained by averaging an ensemble of single-
channels records. Because this was also true when Ca2+
channels external to the patch were blocked, they deduced
that inactivation is a property of isolated Ca2+ channels.
Furthermore, by averaging separately single-channel
records with low and high initial activity, they found that
initial bursts of openings did not supress subsequent
current levels. Both of these observations are compatible
with the domain model, in which Ca2+-inactivation inher-
its its voltage dependence from single-channel currents,
but they rule out the shell model. The fact that Lux and

Brown obtain similar results for Helix cells, rat and
guinea pig ventricular myocytes, and avian dorsal root
ganglion suggests that these conclusions are rather gen-
eral.

Shortly after this paper was submitted for publication,
Huang et al. (1989) published single channel recordings
of Ca2+-inactivation kinetics for rabbit mesenteric artery.
They successfully analyzed their results using the same
kinetic scheme that we have used, namely one in which
only open channels are inactivated. Furthermore, they
observe that inactivation occurs when elevated Ca2+ (2
mM) is applied to the cytoplasmic face of the patch from
which they conclude that calcium binds to an internal site
not in the pore. By increasing the frequency cut-off of
their noise filter to 2 kHz they observed flickering of the
open state, from which they were able to deduce values for
the inactivation rate constants, k+ and k_. For mesenteric
artery k+ lies between 0.3 and 0.7 mM-ms-i and k_
between 1.7 and 4.6 ms.-'. Their values of k_ are several
orders of magnitude greater than the value of 0.018 ms- 1
that we need to explain Plant's data whereas their values
of k+ are about an order of magnitude larger than the
value that we estimate for the $-cell. In light of their
work, frequency resolved single-channel measurements
on d-cell Ca2+ channels would seem to be in order.

APPENDIX
The rate constants a(V) and ,8(V) were determined using Eqs. 3 and 5.
We took a constant value of Tm = 1.25 ms from Rorsman and Trube
(1986), who fit the activation with the Boltzmann function

mt(V) = 1 + exp [(Vm - V)/Sm]

1

At low-external Ca2" (2.5 mM) they found Vm = 4.0 mV and Sm = 14.0
mV. To match Plant's I-V curves, which were obtained with high
external Ca2 (10 mM), we have set Vm = - 5.0 mV and Sm = 10.0 mV
(Frankenhauser and Hodgkin, 1957). We use the Goldman-Hodgkin-
Katz formula (Goldman, 1943; Hodgkin and Katz, 1949) to describe the
single-channel current:

1(V) =g~Ca~RT [

2FVrCao - Cai,0 exp (2FV/RT)]
J

1 - exp (2FV/RT)

Here gCa is the single-channel conductance, P converts concentration to
membrane potential. By matching the I-Vcurves obtained by Plant with
Cao = 10 mM (Fig. 2 b) we arrived at a value P = 14 mVmM- . We
use 7 pS for the single-channel Ca2` conductance, gca' and 200 for the
total number of Ca2` channels, Nca, to give a maximal Ca2l
conduc-
tance of 1,400 pS as previously (Sherman et al., 1988). For simplicity we
omitted the dependence of i(V) on intracellular Ca2" in our simulations
because replacing Cain by Cai or, in the worst case, Cad (Eq. 1 d) has
only small effects. Therefore, in the model, the Ca2` current never
reverses, but it is nearly 0 for V larger than 80 mV (Fig. 2 b).

We chose k

and k+ to approximate the rate and degree of
inactivation in Plant's voltage clamp currents. We obtained reasonable

Sherman et al.
Sherman et al.

Domain Model for Calcium Inactivation
Domain Model for Calcium Inactivation

993993

agreement by using k = 0.018 ms-' and setting k+A = l0k-/gca
(ms-'pA-'). Typical values for the pseudo first-order rate constant for
Ca2" binding, k+Ai(V), are then 0.01 - 0.1 ms-', being larger at
negative voltages where the single-channel Ca2" current is larger. In
order to obtain a value for k+ separately, one must know A. If A = 0.7
mMpA-' then Cad = 0.35 mM when the single-channel current is 0.5
pA, consistent with the diffusion calculations of Simon and Llinas
(1985). Then k+ is about 0.036 mM-'ms-', well below the diffusion
controlled limit of 103 mM-'ms-' (Hague, 1971). Thus, either the
calcium binding site must be partially inaccessible or the bimolecular
process in Eq. 1 b must correspond to an instantaneous binding
equilibrium followed by a conformational change, as described in section
II. With the same choice of A the dissociation constant, Kd - kj/k+, is
-0.5 mM. In general, Kd will be proportional to A and Cad.

Some of the calculations for this study were carried out at the NCI
Advanced Scientific Computing Laboratory. We thank Dr. J. Maizel for
providing computer time, Dr. Eduardo Rojas for reading of the
manuscript, and an anonymous reviewer for pointing out the work of
Lux and Brown.
Dr. Keizer acknowledges support from National Science Foundation
grant CHE 86-18647 and the Agricultural Experiment Station at UC
Davis. Dr. Sherman was supported by an NRC-National Institutes of
Health Research Associateship.

Receivedfor publication 25 September 1989 and in final form
27 March 1990.

REFERENCES

Armstrong, D., and R. Eckert. 1987. Voltage-activated calcium chan-
nels that must be phosphorylated to respond to membrane depolariza-
tion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 84:2518-2522.

Armstrong, C., and D. Kalman. 1988. The role of protein phosphoryla-
tion in the response of dihydropyridine-sensitive calcium channels to
membrane depolarization in mammalian pituitary tumor cells. In
Calcium and Ion Channel Modulation. A. Grinnell, D. Armstrong,
and M. Jackson, editors. Plenum Publishing Co., New York. 215-
288.

Ashcroft, F. M., and P. R. Stanfield. 1982. Calcium inactivation in
skeletal muscle fibres of the stick insect, Carausius morosus. J.
Physiol. (Lond.) 330:349-372.

Atwater, I., C. M. Dawson, A. Scott, G. Eddlestone, and E. Rojas. 1980.
The nature of the oscillatory behavior in electrical activity for
pancreatic ,B-cell. J. Horm. Metabol. Res., Suppl. 10:100-107.

Chad, J. E., and R. Eckert. 1984. Calcium domains associated with
individual channels can account for anomalous voltage relations of
Ca-dependent responses. Biophys. J. 45:993-999.

Chad, J. E., R. Eckert, and D. Ewald. 1984. Kinetics of calcium-
dependent inactivation of calcium current in voltage-clamped neu-
rones of Aplysia californica. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 347:270-300.

Chay, T. R. 1987. The effect of inactivation of calcium channels by
intracellular Ca2" ions in the bursting pancreatic a-cells. Cell
Biophys. 11:77-90.

Chay, T. R., and H. S. Kang. 1987. Multiple oscillatory states and chaos
in the endogenous activity of excitable cells: pancreatic #-cell as an
example. In Chaos in Biological Systems. H. Degn, A. V. Holden, and
L. F. Olsen, editors. Plenum Publishing Co., New York. 173-181.

Chay, T. R., and H. S. Kang. 1988. Role of single-channel stochastic
noise on bursting clusters of pancreatic ,-cells. Biophys. J. 54:427-
435.

Chay, T. R., and J. Keizer. 1983. Minimal model for membrane

oscillations in the pancreatic ,-cell. Biophys. J. 42:181-190.

Eckert, R., and J. E. Chad. 1984. Inactivation of Ca channels. Prog.

Biophys. Mol. Biol. 44:215-267.

Fenwick, E. M., A. Marty, and E. Neher. 1982. Sodium and calcium
channels in bovine chromaffin cells. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 331:599-635.
Frankenhaeuser, B., and A. L. Hodgkin. 1957. The action of calcium on
the electrical properties of squid axons. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 137:218-
244.

Fogelson, A., and R. Zucker. 1985. Presynaptic calcium diffusion from

various arrays of single channels. Biophys. J. 48:1003-1017.

Goldman, D. E. 1943. Potential, impedance, and rectifications in

membranes. J. Gen. Physiol. 27:36-60.

Grapengiesser, E., E. Gylfe, and B. Hellman. 1988. Glucose-induced
oscillations of cytoplasmic Ca2, in the pancreatic ,-cell. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 151:1299-1304.

Hagiwara, S., and H. Ohmori. 1983. Studies of single calcium channel
currents in rat clonal pituitary cells. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 336:649-
661.

Hague, D. N. 1971. Fast Reactions. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Hernandez-Cruz, A., F. Sala, and P. R. Adams. 1990. Subcellular
calcium transients visualized by confocal microscopy in a voltage-
clamped vertebrate neuron. Science (Wash. DC). 247:858-862.

Hiriart, M., and D. R. Matteson. 1988. Na channels and two types of Ca
channels in rat pancreatic B cells identified with the reverse hemolytic
plaque assay. J. Gen. Physiol. 91:617-639.

Hodgkin, A. L., and B. Katz. 1949. The effect of sodium ions on the
electrical activity of the giant axon of the squid. J. Physiol. (Lond.).
108:37-77.

Huang, Y., J. M. Quayle, J. F. Worley, N. B. Standen, and M. T.
Nelson. 1989. External cadmium and internal calcium block of single
calcium channels in smooth muscle cells from rabbit mesenteric
artery. Biophys. J. 56:1023-1028.

Kalman, D., P. H. O'Lague, C. Erxleben, and D. L. Armstrong. 1988.
Calcium-dependent inactivation of the dihydropyridine-sensitive cal-
cium channels in GH3 cells. J. Gen. Physiol. 92:531-548.

Keahey, H. H., A. S. Rajan, A. E. Boyd, and D. L. Kunze. 1989.
Characterization of voltage-dependent Ca2" channels in ,-cell line.
Diabetes. 38:188-193.

Keizer, J., and G. Magnus. 1989. ATP-sensitive potassium channel and

bursting in the pancreatic ,-cell. Biophys. J 56:229-242.

Lux, H. D., and A. M. Brown. 1984. Single channel studies on
inactivation of calcium currents. Science (Wash. DC) 225:432-434.
Perez-Armendariz, E., and I. Atwater. 1986. Glucose-evoked changes in
[K+] and [Ca2"] in the intercellular spaces of the mouse islet of
Langerhans. In Biophysics of the Pancreatic p-Cell. I. Atwater, E.
Rojas, and B. Soria, editors. Plenum Publishing Co., New York.
31-51.

Plant, T. D. 1988. Properties and calcium-dependent inactivation of
calcium currents in cultured mouse pancreatic B-cells. J. Physiol.
(Lond.). 404:731-747.

Ribalet, B., and P. M. Beigelman. 1980. Calcium action potentials and
potassium permeability activation in pancreatic ,-cells Am. J. Phys-
iol. 239:C124-C 133.

Rinzel, J. 1985. Bursting oscillations in an excitable membrane model.
In Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations, B. D. Sleeman and
R. J. Jarvis, editors. Springer-Verlag, New York. 304-316.

994

Biophysical Journal

Volume 58

October 1990

Rorsman, P., and G. Trube. 1986. Calcium and delayed potassium
currents in mouse pancreatic ,B-cells under voltage clamp conditions.
J. Physiol. (Lond.). 374:531-550.

Rorsman, P., F. M. Aschcroft, and G. Trube. 1988. Single Ca channel
currents in mouse pancreatic B-cells. Pfluegers Arch. Eur. J. Physiol.
412:597-603.

Rosenberg, R. L., P. Hess, and R. W. Tsien. 1988. Cardiac calcium
channels in planar lipid bilayers. L-type channels and calcium
permeable channels open at negative membrane potentials. J. Gen
Physiol. 92:27-54.

Satin, L. S., and D. L. Cook. 1985. Voltage-gated Ca2" current in

pancreatic B-cells Pfluegers Arch. Eur. J. Physiol. 404:385-387.

Satin, L. S., and D. L. Cook. 1988. Evidence for two calcium currents in
insulin-secreting cells. Pfluegers Arch. Eur. J. Physiol. 411:401-409.

Satin, L. S., and D. L. Cook. 1989. Calcium current inactivation in
insulin-secreting cells is mediated by calcium influx and membrane
depolarization. Pfluegers Arch. Eur. J. Physiol. 414:1-10.

Sherman, A., J. Rinzel, and J. Keizer. 1988. Emergence of organized
bursting in clusters of pancreatic j#-cells by channel sharing. Biophys.
J. 54:411-425.

Simon, S. M., and R. R. Llinas. 1985. Compartmentalization of the
submembrane calcium activity during calcium influx and its signifi-
cance in transmitter release. Biophys. J. 48:485-498.

Standen, N. B., and P. R. Stanfield. 1982. A binding-site model for
calcium channel inactivation that depends on calcium entry. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. Biol. Sci. 217:101-110.

Velasco, J. M. 1988. Calcium channels in insulin-secreting RINm5F

cell line. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 398:15P.

Sherman et al.

Domain Model for Calcium Inactivation

995

