Electrophysiological Properties of Inferior Olive Neurons:
A Compartmental Model

NICOLAS SCHWEIGHOFER,1 KENJI DOYA,1 AND MITSUO KAWATO1,2
1ERATO, Kawato Dynamic Brain Project, Japan Science and Technology Corporation; and 2ATR Human Information
Processing Research Laboratories, Kyoto 619-0288 Japan

Schweighofer, Nicolas, Kenji Doya, and Mitsuo Kawato. Electro-
physiological properties of inferior olive neurons: a compartmental
model. J. Neurophysiol. 82: 804 – 817, 1999. As a step in exploring
the functions of the inferior olive, we constructed a biophysical model
of the olivary neurons to examine their unique electrophysiological
properties. The model consists of two compartments to represent the
known distribution of ionic currents across the cell membrane, as well
as the dendritic location of the gap junctions and synaptic inputs. The
somatic compartment includes a low-threshold calcium current (ICa_l),
an anomalous inward rectiﬁer current (Ih), a sodium current (INa), and
a delayed rectiﬁer potassium current (IK_dr). The dendritic compart-
ment contains a high-threshold calcium current (ICa_h), a calcium-
dependent potassium current (IK_Ca), and a current ﬂowing into other
cells through electrical coupling (Ic). First, kinetic parameters for
these currents were set according to previously reported experimental
data. Next, the remaining free parameters were determined to account
for both static and spiking properties of single olivary neurons in vitro.
We then performed a series of simulated pharmacological experi-
ments using bifurcation analysis and extensive two-parameter
searches. Consistent with previous studies, we quantitatively demon-
strated the major role of ICa_l in spiking excitability. In addition, Ih
had an important modulatory role in the spike generation and period
of oscillations, as previously suggested by Bal and McCormick.
Finally, we investigated the role of electrical coupling in two coupled
spiking cells. Depending on the coupling strength, the hyperpolariza-
tion level, and the ICa_l and Ih modulation, the coupled cells had four
different synchronization modes: the cells could be in-phase, phase-
shifted, or anti-phase or could exhibit a complex desynchronized
spiking mode. Hence these simulation results support the counterin-
tuitive hypothesis that electrical coupling can desynchronize coupled
inferior olive cells.

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Cerebellar Purkinje cells, the sole output of the cerebellar
cortex, receive two major inputs: the climbing ﬁber input,
which originates from the inferior olive (IO), and the granule
cell input, which relays information from the mossy ﬁbers.
Each Purkinje cell is innervated by one climbing ﬁber, and a
single IO spike generates a single “complex spike” in a Pur-
kinje cell. In contrast, a Purkinje cell receives ⱕ200,000 gran-
ule cell inputs, which generate a high-frequency discharge
(“simple spikes”). Because IO neurons ﬁre at a very low
frequency (at most 2 or 3 spikes within a second), there are
comparatively few complex spikes. Although it is well known
that simple spikes are involved in motor control, the role of

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement”
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

complex spikes is more controversial (De Zeeuw et al. 1998;
Simpson et al. 1996). The view that climbing ﬁber inputs
function as detectors of control errors is well supported (e.g.,
Kitazawa et al. 1998; Kobayashi et al. 1998). However, it is
still unclear whether climbing ﬁbers exert a real-time inﬂuence
on the targets of the Purkinje cells, and/or exert a short-term
modulatory action on simple spike patterns, or induce long-
lasting changes in the potency of granule cell-Purkinje cell
synapses.

IO neurons exhibit a number of unique electrophysiological
properties. First, IO cells respond to both injection of depolar-
izing currents and release from hyperpolarization by generat-
ing, respectively, dendritic and somatic spikes (Llina´s and
Yarom 1981a). Second, in vitro IO cells can exhibit 4- to 8-Hz
rhythmic activity (Bal and McCormick 1997; Benardo and
Foster 1986; Llina´s and Yarom 1986). This rhythmic activity
can either take the form of subthreshold sinusoid-like oscilla-
tions or rhythmic generation of sodium spikes. Furthermore
these oscillations can occur either spontaneously [in ⬃10% of
the cells recorded by Llina´s and Yarom (1986); but Benardo
and Foster (1986) reported a larger proportion of oscillating
cells] or after harmaline or serotonin administration (Sugihara
et al. 1995). Third, the cells are coupled by electrotonic gap
junctions located on the dendrites (Llina´s et al. 1974; Sotelo et
al. 1974). Through the combined actions of the coupling be-
tween cells and the underlying rhythmicity of individual neu-
rons, neighboring IO cells have been shown to ﬁre with some
rhythmicity in brain slices and acute preparations (Llina´s and
Yarom 1986; Sasaki et al. 1989). Yarom (1991) suggested that
the IO is a network of damped oscillators that, when coupled,
can generate sustained oscillations. However, the oscillatory
behavior of IO cells in vivo is still under investigation because
apparently random, rather than periodic, ﬁring has been ob-
served in behaving animals (Keating and Thach 1995). Thus it
is probable that synaptic and modulatory inputs inﬂuence the
oscillating behavior of single as well as group of coupled cells.
Besides the very strong excitatory dendritic inputs (e.g., De
Zeeuw et al. 1998), IO cells receive two types of inhibitory
inputs: the ﬁrst affects the excitability of the cell, whereas the
second modulates the coupling strength between cells (Lang et
al. 1996). Moreover, a strong serotonergic input to the IO from
the midbrain raphe has been identiﬁed (Weiss and Pellet 1982).
Several studies have described the membrane currents of IO
neurons and their inﬂuence on cell responses (Bal and McCor-
mick 1997; Benardo and Foster 1986; Bleasel and Pettigrew
1994; Llina´s and Yarom 1981b, 1986; Manor 1995; Manor et
al. 1997; Ruigrok and Voogd 1985; Yarom and Llina´s 1987).

804

0022-3077/99 $5.00 Copyright © 1999 The American Physiological Society

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF INFERIOR OLIVARY NEURONS

805

IO neurons exhibit two types of spatially distinct calcium
currents: a low-threshold current (ICa_l) located in the soma and
a high-threshold current (ICa_h) located in the dendrites (Llina´s
and Yarom 1981a,b). IO cells respond to both release from
hyperpolarization and injection of depolarizing currents via
these two calcium currents. The low-threshold calcium current
has a window of conductance around the resting membrane
potential, which causes the cell to be excited in response to
hyperpolarizing current pulses. The high-threshold calcium
current is noninactivating, which results in a prolonged plateau
potential in response to depolarizing dendritic input. The cal-
cium inﬂux in the dendrites activates a calcium-dependent
potassium current (IK_Ca), which abruptly terminates the pla-
teau potential after ⬃30 ms (Llina´s and Yarom 1981a). The
inactivation of IK_Ca has a very long time constant (several
hundred milliseconds), resulting in a long afterhyperpolariza-
tion (AHP). The AHP deinactivates the low-threshold calcium
conductance and triggers a postinhibitory rebound. Further-
more, hyperpolarization activates an anomalous rectifying cur-
rent (Bleasel and Pettigrew 1994; Yarom and Llina´s 1987). Bal
and McCormick (1997) recently argued that the h current (Ih),
which originally was described in thalamocortical relay neu-
rons (Huguenard and McCormick 1992), may account for
many IO cell properties. They proposed that Ih, which is
activated at hyperpolarized potentials, contributes to the pres-
ence, amplitude, and frequency of the subthreshold oscilla-
tions. Finally, like most other neurons, IO cells can generate
somatic sodium spikes (with the sodium current INa) that are
terminated by a delayed rectiﬁer potassium current (IK_dr).
However, a single spike is generated during the plateau poten-
tial, indicating a strong refractoriness of the sodium current
(Llina´s and Yarom 1981a).

The existence of electrical coupling between IO cell den-
drites make voltage-clamp recording of individual IO cells
arduous (Manor 1995). It is thus difﬁcult to analyze the con-
tribution of individual currents to the response of olivary
neurons. Conductance-based models of neurons, however, if
sufﬁciently constrained by biological data, may provide a
means to test different hypotheses by systematically changing
their parameters (e.g., maximal conductances of ionic chan-
nels). In the present study, we extended the single compartment
model developed by Manor et al. (1997), which included only
ICa_l and a leak current, and built a two-compartment model of
IO neurons, where the ﬁrst compartment represented the soma
and the second compartment represented the lumped dendrites.
The dendritic compartment permits us to account for the
known dendritic location of the high-threshold calcium current,
the gap junctions, and the synaptic inputs. We constrained the
parameters of our model with experimental data whenever
possible and reproduced many experimentally observed ﬁnd-
ings.

First, we further explored how the modulation of individual
current conductances leads to different asymptotic electrical
behaviors in single olivary neurons in vitro. Speciﬁcally, we
quantitatively tested the inﬂuence of the low threshold calcium
current ICa_l and the h current Ih on single IO cell ﬁring
patterns. Consistent with previous experimental ﬁndings, we
quantitatively demonstrated the major role of ICa_l in spiking
excitability. In addition, in line with the study of Bal and
McCormick (1997), we found that Ih had an important modu-
latory role in the spike generation and period of oscillations.

Then we examined the role of electrical coupling on the
spiking behavior of IO cells. Because IO cells were discovered
to be extensively coupled by gap junctions (Llina´s et al. 1974;
Sotelo et al. 1974), researchers have been looking for the
functional roles of the electrical coupling. In most neurophys-
iological studies, electrical coupling is thought to be responsi-
ble for the synchronization of groups of neurons. However, in
several mathematical studies of simple coupled neuron models,
anti-phase as well as irregular spiking have been observed
(Abarbanel et al. 1996; Kawato et al. 1979; Sherman and
Rinzel 1992). Thus, although counterintuitive, electrical cou-
pling theoretically could desynchronize rather than synchro-
nize coupled cells. In the present study, we found that two
coupled IO cells could have different spiking modes depending
on the coupling strength, the hyperpolarization level, and the
modulation of ICa_l and Ih currents: the two cells could be
in-phase, phase-shifted, or anti-phase or could exhibit a com-
plex, desynchronized spiking mode. We discuss the robustness
and signiﬁcance of the desynchronization for the in vivo func-
tioning of the IO in light of the known effect of serotonin on IO
neurons.

M E T H O D S

General cell model

The electrotonic properties of the two-compartment model (Fig.
1A) were determined by two morphological parameters (Pinsky and
Rinzel 1994): the ratio of the somatic area to total surface area (p) and
the electrotonic coupling conductance between the two compartments
(gint). For each compartment, the membrane potential (V) changed
according to

⫽ ⫺冘

i

Cm

dV
dt

Ii ⫹ Iapp

Cm is the membrane capacitance, Iapp is the applied current (common
to both compartments) and 冘
Ii accounts for the ionic currents, the
current ﬂowing out into the other compartment, and the current
ﬂowing through the gap junctions (currents in ␮A/cm2).

i

Somatic currents

The somatic ionic currents included ICa_l, Ih, an inward sodium
current (INa) and a delayed rectiﬁer outward potassium current (IK_dr),
as well as the current ﬂowing out into the dendrites (Ids) and the

leakage current (Ils).1冘

Ii ⫽ ICa_l ⫹ Ih ⫹ INa ⫹ IK_dr ⫹ Ids ⫹ Ils

i

To model these currents, we used data obtained from IO cells
whenever possible; but when not available, we used experimentally
derived data or models of similar currents from other neural systems.
Manor (1995) quantiﬁed the activation and inactivation functions of
ICa_l in the IO cell (see APPENDIX). Ih was modeled in thalamic relay
neurons by Huguenard and McCormick (1992). The equation for Ids
was obtained from Rush and Rinzel (1994), as was IK_dr. Because a
sodium current of the Hodgkin-Huxley type would generate several
spikes during the plateau potential, whereas IO neurons normally only

1 Yarom and Llina´s (1987) demonstrated that the anomalous rectifying
current consists of two parts: a time-dependent component and an instanta-
neous component. Due to the lack of a precise current model, we did not
include the instantaneous component of the anomalous rectifying current in the
present model.

806

N. SCHWEIGHOFER, K. DOYA, AND M. KAWATO

FIG. 1. Model of

inferior olive (IO) neurons. A:
2-compartment biophysical model of an IO cell. Somatic
ionic currents include a low-threshold calcium inward
current (ICa_l), an anomalous inward rectiﬁer current (Ih),
the Hodgkin-Huxley type inward sodium (INa) and out-
ward delayed rectiﬁer potassium (IK_dr) currents, the cur-
rent ﬂowing out into the dendritic compartment (Ids), and
a leakage current (Ils). Dendritic currents include a high-
threshold inward calcium current (ICa_h), an outward cal-
cium-dependent potassium current (IK_Ca),
the current
ﬂowing into the somatic compartment (Isd), and a leakage
current (Ild). Because the dendritic potassium Current
IK_Ca is calcium-dependent, Ca2⫹ concentration dynamics
is included in the model. gint is the coupling conductance
between the two compartments. B: 2 cells electrotonically
coupled by a single hypothetical gap junction with max-
imal coupling conductance gc. Electrotonic coupling cur-
rent between the cells is given by Ic.

generate a single spike, we adapted a new type of INa with a long-
lasting inactivation component. The somatic currents are given by

of gap junctions between two cells can be represented by a single
conductance, gc.2 Thus the dendritic ionic currents are given by

ICa_l ⫽ gCa_lk3l共Vs ⫺ VCa兲

Ih ⫽ ghq共Vs ⫺ Vh兲

INa ⫽ gNam⬁共Vs兲3h共Vs ⫺ VNa兲

IK_dr ⫽ gK_drn4共Vs ⫺ VK兲

Ids ⫽ 共gint/p兲共Vs ⫺ Vd兲

Ils ⫽ gls共Vs ⫺ Vl兲

where k, l, q, h, and n are activation and inactivation variables, the
kinetics of which are described in the APPENDIX; Vs is the membrane
potential of the soma and Vd is the membrane potential of the dendrite.
VCa, Vh, VNa, and VK are the reversal potentials of the sodium,
potassium, calcium, and h currents, respectively (potentials in mV);
gCa_l, gh, gNa, gK_dr, and gls are maximal conductances (in mS/cm2).

Dendritic currents

The dendritic ionic currents include ICa_h, IK_Ca, the current ﬂowing
into the somatic compartment (Isd), a leakage current (Ild), and the
current ﬂowing into other cells through electrical coupling (Ic). Thus
the dendritic currents are given by

冘

Ii ⫽ ICa_h ⫹ IK_Ca ⫹ Isd ⫹ Ild ⫹ Ic

i

Traub et al. (1991) modeled ICa_h, IK_Ca, and the dynamics of calcium
concentration for CA3 neurons. Rush and Rinzel (1994) described the
expression of Isd for a two-compartment cell model. Finally, like all
gap junctions between all mammalian cells thus far evaluated
(Moreno et al. 1994), the conductance of Ic has been shown recently
to be voltage dependent (Kogan and Yarom 1997). Precise voltage-
dependency curves are not yet available for the gap junction protein
connexin36, which is important for the IO (Condorelli et al. 1998).
Therefore we adopted the general voltage-dependency model from
Benett and Versedis (1992), and we set the parameters according to
the activity of the gap junction protein connexin43 (Moreno et al.
1994). The number of gap junctions is presumably between 5 and 20
for any pair of IO cells (De Zeeuw et al. 1996). However, as we
modeled only a single dendritic compartment per cell, an agglomerate

ICa_h ⫽ gCa_hr2共Vd ⫺ VCa兲

IK_Ca ⫽ gK_Cas共Vd ⫺ VK兲

Ild ⫽ gld共Vd ⫺ Vl兲

Isd ⫽ 关gint/共1 ⫺ p兲兴共Vd ⫺ Vs兲

Ic ⫽ gc f共Vd ⫺ Vde兲共Vd ⫺ Vde兲

where r and s are activation and inactivation variables, respectively
(see APPENDIX); f represents the transjunctional voltage dependence of
the gap junction conductance; Vd is the dendritic membrane potential
of the cell; Vde is the dendritic membrane potential of another IO cell
in electrotonic contact with the cell; gCa_h, gK_Ca, gld, and gc are
maximal conductances.

Modeling a “standard” cell

A neural model can have a wide variety of responses when large
parameter ranges are considered (Rinzel and Ermentrout 1989). Our
model of IO neurons, although simpliﬁed, contains a large number of
parameters. Consequently whenever possible, physiologically plausi-
ble ranges of parameters are ﬁrst taken into account (see Table 1).
Moreover we use typical values for sodium, potassium, and calcium
⫽
reversal potentials and membrane capacitance: VNa
⫺75 mV, and VCa
⫽ 1 ␮F/cm2, respectively. We
⫽ ⫺43 mV, as
took the reversal potential of the h current to be Vh
reported by Huguenard and McCormick (1992). The remaining un-
known parameters were investigated using the simulation software
package XPPAUT (Ermentrout 1997) to integrate the equations of the
system. We developed a “standard” cell that possessed most of the
known electrophysiological properties of IO cells by taking a priori
ranges of parameters into account when available.

⫽ 120 mV and Cm

⫽ 55 mV, VK

2 The electrotonic coupling conductance gint between the somatic and den-
dritic compartments mathematically represents the inverse of the cell’s cyto-
plasmic resistivity. The electrical coupling conductance gc between the cells
reﬂects the strength of the intercellular electrical coupling. Although these two
types of coupling are very different physiologically, in two-compartment
models they are represented similarly, by the coupling conductances gint and
gc. However, to account for the cell integrity, the value of the former must be
much higher than the value of the latter.

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF INFERIOR OLIVARY NEURONS

807

TABLE 1. A priori ranges of several parameters

Parameter

p
gint, mS/cm2

gc, mS/cm2
gCa_l, mS/cm2

gls and gld, mS/cm2

Sensitivity analysis

Range

0.1–0.4
0.1–3

⬍ gint

gc
0.1–3

⬍0.5

Source

Manor (1995)
Pinsky and Rinzel (1994)
Booth et al. (1997)
Mainen and Sejnowski (1996)

Manor (1995)
Manor et al. (1997)
Manor et al. (1997)

We tracked the stationary and periodic solutions of the system with
a change in a parameter (such as the input current) using the bifur-
cation analysis software AUTO (Doedel 1981). AUTO also allowed
us to compute the frequency of oscillations, detect the bifurcation of
solutions, and track the bifurcation points (e.g., the onset of oscilla-
tions) in two-dimensional parameter space. Because it was impossible
to track the bifurcation of periodic orbits with this software (e.g.,
points for which 2 periodic solutions, such as subthreshold oscillations
and spontaneous spiking, coalesce), we developed a custom simulator
based on the integration simulation package CVODE (Cohen and
Hindmarsh 1994). Thus we could explore spiking behaviors when one
or two parameters were varied. By numerically integrating the model
equations with different parameter values, we uncovered several
asymptotic cell response domains: return to rest (R) after a period of
transients, spontaneous subthreshold oscillations (SO), spontaneous
somatic spiking (SS), spontaneous dendritic spiking (DS). In some
cases, the cell could stay in different symptotic states depending on
the initial conditions: the cell was then described bistable, and in this
case the domains were overlapping.3 For instance, when the SO
domain overlapped with SS, the cell behavior was denoted to be
SS/SO bistable. Note that in the sensitivity analysis graphs, we plotted
both the results obtained with AUTO (for the domain of oscillatory
behavior emerging from rest) and the results obtained with our sim-
ulator (for the other domains).

Analyzing the responses of two coupled cells

We examined the behavior of two coupled cells when gc varied
(Fig. 1B). To describe the extent of synchronization between two
identical cells that receive identical inputs, we computed the average
“distance” D(␶, gc), in millivolts, between the somatic membrane
potentials (Abarbanel et al. 1996). This measure is essentially the root
mean square difference between the somatic membrane potentials of
the two cells, Vs1 and Vs2, with a time shift ␶. The time shift between
the activities of the neurons is necessary to “align” the neurons’
responses. The average distance is mathematically deﬁned by

D共␶, gc兲 ⫽冑1

N

冘

N

t⫽1

关Vs1共t兲 ⫺ Vs2共t ⫹ ␶兲兴2

where N is the total number of time steps (1 time step was 1 ms). As
in Abarbanel et al., we plot D(␶
min, gc), which is the distance for the

3 To detect these cases, current pulses of 21 different intensities (from ⫺8
␮A/cm2 to ⫹ 8 ␮A/cm2, for 50 ms) were injected into the cell’s soma. We
considered the cell to be bi-stable if at least one current injection could
generate sustained spiking (when the cell was not spontaneously spiking before
the current injection) or stop spiking (when the cell was spontaneously spiking
before the current injection). Note that this method introduces a resolution limit
of 0.8 ␮A/cm2, which corresponds to 0.08 nA only for a total cell surface of
10,000 ␮m2. It is therefore possible that we missed some small ranges of
bi-stability. However, these very small bi-stability ranges would have negli-
gible physiological consequences.

min, gc) is zero and the time shift ␶

time shift ␶
min that yields the minimum value of D(␶, gc), for ﬁxed
coupling. For instance, if the neurons are anti-phase, the distance
D(␶
min equals to half a period.
Initially a perturbing stimulus input was given at t ⫽ 1 s in cell 1. The
distance was then computed over 10 s, from t ⫽ 5 s to ignore the
transients.

R E S U L T S

Standard cell

⫽ gld

⫽ 18, gCA_l

⫽ 1.0, and gh

⫽ 35; leak: gls

⫽ 70, gK_dr
⫽ 4.0 and gK_Ca

⫽ ⫺10 mV; cell morphology: gint

Using the following parameter values (conductances in mS/
⫽ 1.5;
cm2), soma: gNa
⫽ 0.015
dendrite: gCa_h
⫽ 0.13 and p ⫽ 0.20,
and vl
data from our standard cell model were consistent with many
reported experimental ﬁndings from actual IO neurons.
STEADY-STATE PROPERTIES. The membrane potential with no
⫽ 0 ␮A/cm2) was ⫺57 mV, whereas the
input current (Iapp
input resistance derived from the voltage-current curve was 36
M⍀. When Iapp
⫽ ⫺5 ␮A/cm2, the potential was ⫺80.3 mV
and the input resistance was 14 M⍀, reﬂecting the effect of the
⫽ ⫹5 ␮A/cm2, the membrane potential
h current. When Iapp
was ⫺46 mV and the input resistance was only 10 M⍀ because
of the effect of the delayed rectiﬁer current. These steady-state
values are in agreement with published experimental data (see
for instance Table 1 in Llina´s and Yarom 1981a; Fig. 1A in
Yarom and Llina´s 1987; Manor 1995). Note that 1 ␮A/cm2
corresponds to 0.1 nA for a total cell surface of 10,000 ␮m2.
DEPOLARIZING CURRENT INPUT. We injected depolarizing step
currents of 50-ms duration, beginning at t ⫽ 200 ms in the cell
at rest (Fig. 2). When the injected current intensity was ⬎3
␮A/cm2, the cell ﬁrst responded with a somatic sodium spike
immediately followed by a dendritic calcium plateau potential
(Fig. 2A), which lasted for ⬃35 ms. The calcium plateau
potential, due to activation of ICa_h, created a large calcium ion
inﬂux in the dendrites, which in turn activated IK_Ca (Fig. 2C).
This eventually terminated the plateau potential and created a
large, long-lasting AHP ⬃13 mV below the resting membrane
potential. At the offset of the dendritic spike, ICa_h, ICa_l, and Ih
are all completely inactivated (as are INa and IK_dr). Thus the
only nonzero current is IK_Ca. Because this current is driven by
relatively slow dendritic calcium dynamics and possesses a
long inactivation time constant, the AHP is dominated by
IK_Ca. Note that even though the conductance of IK_Ca is high,
the amplitude of IK_Ca is small during the AHP because the
membrane potential is close to the potassium reversal potential.
The AHP terminated sharply after ⬃300 ms due to rebound
excitation, which is consistent with published data (see Fig. 7A
in Llina´s and Yarom 1981b). The time courses of the somatic
currents (Fig. 2B) revealed that the AHP termination is initially
due to the activation of Ih, which increases the membrane
potential. Then when the soma is sufﬁciently depolarized, ICa_l
starts to be activated, which results in the rebound of excita-
tion.
HYPERPOLARIZING CURRENT INPUT. We then studied the re-
sponse of the standard cell model to a hyperpolarizing current
pulse (t ⫽ 500 ms, duration ⫽ 100 ms, intensity ⫽ ⫺1.5
␮A/cm2) superimposed on different tonic hyperpolarizing cur-
⫽ 0 ␮A/cm2, the activation of the
rents (Iapp). When Iapp
low-threshold calcium conductance, as well as the recovery of

808

N. SCHWEIGHOFER, K. DOYA, AND M. KAWATO

Parameter sensitivity analysis
BIFURCATION ANALYSIS. The steady-state cell responses at dif-
ferent hyperpolarized membrane potentials can be predicted
from a bifurcation diagram plotting the minimum and maxi-
mum values of the somatic membrane potential for Iapp. The
cell had a stable steady state for all Iapp values except between
⫺1.17 ␮A/cm2 and ⫺0.37 ␮A/cm2 (Fig. 4; ⫺1.17 and ⫺0.37
corresponded to the 2 Hopf bifurcation points marked a and b).
Within this range, the cell exhibited subthreshold oscillations
⫽ ⫺0.85
that reached a maximum amplitude of 9.8 mV for Iapp
␮A/cm2, and the frequency of these subthreshold oscillations
was 5–7 Hz. These values are similar to those recorded in real
IO neurons (Benardo and Foster 1986; Lampl and Yarom
1997; Llina´s and Yarom 1986).
LOW-THRESHOLD CALCIUM CURRENT. Because the low-thresh-
old calcium current has a central role in IO oscillatory behav-
ior, we examined the variation of gCa_l in our model. We ﬁrst
⫽ 1.2 mS/cm2 and
analyzed the behavior of a cell with gCa_l
⫽ 1.0 mS/cm2). The
compared it to our standard cell (gCa_l
relatively small increase in gCa_l resulted in a very different
bifurcation diagram (Fig. 5). The cell had multiple stable
behaviors, speciﬁcally, SS, SO, and R (an example of SS
behavior can be seen in Fig. 7D). The spontaneous somatic
spiking was between the points marked a and b in the ﬁgure,
which correspond to a large range of input currents (⫺1.48 –
0.19 ␮A/cm2). Between the points b and c (Iapp between ⫺0.23
and 0.19 ␮A/cm2), the cell had two stable states, either SS or
R. This bistability has been observed previously (Bal and
McCormick 1997 - see their Fig. 1B for instance). Between the
points c and d, i.e., when Iapp was between ⫺0.73 and ⫺0.23

FIG. 2. Responses of an IO cell model to a dendritic current pulse (inten-
sity: 8 ␮A/cm2, duration: 50 ms). A: somatic membrane potential: the cell 1st
responded with a somatic sodium spike immediately followed by a dendritic
calcium plateau potential ensued by a long-lasting after-hyperpolarization,
which is terminated by a rebound potential. B: somatic currents; C: dendritic
currents (note difference in ordinate scale between B and C).

Ih, during the hyperpolarizing step created a rebound sufﬁcient
to generate a sodium spike (Fig. 3A). This is consistent with
previous experimental data (Bal and McCormick 1997; see
their Fig. 2 for instance). ICa_l then became inactivated and
ICa_h became activated to a moderate degree. The calcium
inﬂux in the dendritic compartment resulted in the IK_Ca acti-
vation, creating an AHP. The cycle began again, and another
spike was generated. After the second spike, however, ICa_l
was no longer sufﬁciently activated to bring the membrane
potential above threshold and only a few more subthreshold
oscillations followed. Thus the standard cell was a damped
oscillator, as reported by Lampl and Yarom (1997). When a
⫽ ⫺0.5 ␮A/cm2 was
tonic bias hyperpolarizing current Iapp
maintained before the current pulse, the cell was SO (Fig. 3B).
The cell ﬁred a burst of six spikes after the pulse. When the
⫽ ⫺1.0 ␮A/cm2 (Fig. 3C), the cell generated two
bias was Iapp
sodium spikes in response to the current pulse. Finally, when
⫽ ⫺1.5 ␮A/cm2 (Fig. 3D), only one spike
the bias was Iapp
was generated and the oscillations were rapidly damped.

FIG. 3. Response of an IO cell model to a hyperpolarizing somatic current
pulse (intensity: ⫺1.5 ␮A/cm2, duration: 100 ms) at different states of tonic
⫽
hyperpolarization. A: Iapp
⫺1.5 ␮A/cm2. Cell is most excitable when Iapp
⫽ ⫺0.5 ␮A/cm2 and sub-
threshold oscillations occur only for moderate values of the tonic hyperpolar-
izing current.

⫽ ⫺1.0; and D: Iapp

⫽ 0.0; B: Iapp

⫽ ⫺0.5; C: Iapp

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF INFERIOR OLIVARY NEURONS

809

FIG. 4. Bifurcation diagram of the membrane potential Vs as a function of
Iapp, which shows the behavior of the standard cell model as a function of the
injected DC current. Cell has a stable steady state for all Iapp values except
between the points marked a and b, where the cell exhibits SO. Thin line:
stable steady state. Thin dotted line: unstable steady state. Thick line: stable
oscillatory behavior. Hopf bifurcations occur at
the thin and thick lines
intersections. R, rest. SO, spontaneous subthreshold oscillations.

␮A/cm2, the stable behaviors were either subthreshold oscil-
lations or spontaneous somatic spiking. For the domain delim-
ited by the points d and e (Iapp between ⫺1.30 and ⫺0.73
␮A/cm2), the only stable state was spontaneous somatic spik-
ing. Finally, the points e and a (Iapp was ⫺1.47 and ⫺1.30
␮A/cm2) delimit another zone of bistability, with either sub-
threshold oscillations or spontaneous spiking.4 The frequencies
of the spiking oscillations ranged from 3.8 to 9.4 Hz, which is
similar to that previously recorded in IO neurons (4 – 8 Hz)
(Bal and McCormick 1997). The frequencies decreased with
stronger hyperpolarization, a result also consistent with previ-
ous observations (see Fig. 2A in Bal and McCormick 1997).
Figure 6 illustrates the domains of asymptotic behaviors as
a function of both Iapp and the maximal conductance gCa_l. The
oscillations were very sensitive to gCa_l: when gCa_l was ⬍0.95
mS/cm2, no oscillation occurred for any applied current value.
When gCa_l was between 1.05 and 2.50 mS/cm2, the SS domain
co-existed with the R domain, for applied currents between
⫺0.75 and 0.15 ␮A/cm2 (bistable SS/R domain). Finally, the
spontaneous subthreshold oscillation domain (SO) was small
and mostly overlapped with the somatic spiking domain (where
the cell is bistable and the domain is described by SS/SO in the
ﬁgure).
h CURRENT. Previous in vitro experiments have shown that gh
is reduced with increasing concentrations of bath-applied Cs⫹
(Bal and McCormick 1997). To model the effects of Cs⫹, gh
was decreased from its standard value 1.5 mS/cm2 (Fig. 7A) to
1.0, 0.5, and 0.0 mS/cm2 (Fig. 7, B–D), while a tonic current of
⫺0.5 ␮A/cm2 was applied (note that a hyperpolarizing current
pulse of ⫺1.5 ␮A/cm2 was injected at 500 ms for 100 ms to
show bistability). The frequency decreased as the conductance
value became smaller: it was ⬃8 Hz with gh
⫽ 1.5 mS/cm2,
and it decreased to 6.2 Hz when Ih was fully suppressed
(frequency analysis conducted with AUTO, data not shown).
Similar results have been found in vitro (Bal and McCormick

4 For a very small range, ⫺1.477 ⬍ Iapp

resting state and somatic spiking.

⬍ ⫺1.470, the stable states were the

FIG. 5. Bifurcation diagram of the membrane potential Vs as a function of
Iapp, which shows the behavior of a different cell in which gCa_l was changed
⫽ 1 mS/cm2). Cell now has multiple
to 1.2 mS/cm2 (for the standard cell, gCa_l
stable behaviors, namely spontaneous somatic spiking (SS), SO, and R. SS
exists between the points a and b. Between the points b and c, the cell has two
stable states, SS and R. Between the points c and d, the stable behaviors are
either SO or SS. For the range delimited by the points d and e, the only stable
state was SS. Finally, the points e and a delimit another bistability zone with
either SO or SS. Thin line: stable steady state. Dotted thin line: unstable steady
state. Thick lines: stable oscillatory behaviors. Open circles: unstable oscilla-
tory trajectories that are not observable.

⫽ 0.5 mS/cm2
1997; see their Fig. 7D). Note also that for gh
⫽ 0.0 mS/cm2, the hyperpolarizing pulse generates a
and gh
dendritic spike. In these cases, as discussed by Yarom and
Llina´s (1987), somatic and dendritic compartments are effec-
tively more strongly coupled because of higher input resis-
tance: the sodium spike can invade the dendritic compartment
enough to generate a dendritic spike.

Next, the effects of systematically varying gh and Iapp were
examined (Fig. 7E). When no current was injected, spontane-
⬍ 0.67 mS/cm2.
ous subthreshold oscillations appeared for gh

FIG. 6. Response domains when both gCa_l and Iapp are varied. Note how
the low-threshold calcium current is crucial for subthreshold and spiking
oscillations. In this ﬁgure and in Figs. 7 and 8, the smooth curves were
obtained by tracking the bifurcation points with AUTO and the segmented
curves were obtained by performing full two parameter searches (see METH-
ODS).

810

N. SCHWEIGHOFER, K. DOYA, AND M. KAWATO

⫽ 1 mS/cm2; C: gh

FIG. 7. Effects of varying the conductance of
⫽ 1.5
the h current (gh) on cell responses. A: gh
⫽ 0.5 mS/
mS/cm2; B: gh
⫽ 0 mS/cm2. Iapp was held constant
cm2; D: gh
at ⫺0.5 ␮A/cm2; and there is a pulse current
injected at 500 ms (intensity: ⫺1.5 ␮A/cm2,
duration: 100 ms). Note the dendritic spike in-
duced by the pulse current in both C and D. E:
response domains as a function of gh and Iapp.
Asterisk-labeled points, A, B, C, and D, corre-
spond to conditions in A, B, C, and D.

For smaller values of the maximal conductance, there was a
small range of applied current for which the cell was sponta-
neous somatic spiking and a larger range for which the cell was
bistable (both SS and SO co-existed).

Behavior of two coupled IO cells

RESPONSES TO A CURRENT PULSE WITH DIFFERENT TONIC
CURRENTS. To investigate the effect of coupling on the oscil-
lating behaviors of two cells, we examined the membrane
potential of cell 1 as a function of both the tonic input current
injected in cell 2 (Iapp2), and the coupling conductance gc (with
⫽ 0 ␮A/cm2). The cells were “standard cells,” except that
Iapp1
⫽ 1.2 mS/cm2 to increase the excitability of the
we set gCa_l
⬍
cells. The two-parameter diagram (Fig. 8A) shows that for gc
0.18 mS/cm2, there were two ranges of Iapp2 with subthreshold
oscillations. In Fig. 8A, to the right of the nearly vertical line
⫽ ⫺0.2 ␮A/cm2), and the area under the curved
(around Iapp2
line, cell 1 was in a stable-steady state. In other regions, the cell
oscillated.

Next, in Fig. 8, B–E, the membrane potentials of the two

⫽ ⫺1 ␮A/cm2 and B and C: Iapp2

cells were plotted for both noncoupled (C and E) and
⫽ 0.05 mS/cm2) for two values of
coupled case (B and D: gc
⫽ ⫺4
Iapp2 (D and E: Iapp2
␮A/cm2). A current pulse (intensity: ⫺1.5 ␮A/cm2, dura-
tion: 100 ms) was injected in cell 1 at t ⫽ 0.5 s. Note how
the coupling modiﬁes the cellular responses: In Fig. 8B, SO
was generated in both cells even though neither of the
individual cells was SO before coupling (Fig. 8C). This
result is in agreement with the theory according to which the
IO is a network of damped oscillators which, when coupled,
can generate sustained oscillations (Yarom 1991). It is also
consistent with the results of the modeling study of Manor
et al. (1997), who showed that, for two cells,
is not
necessary for either cell to oscillate spontaneously to obtain
sustained oscillations when the cells are coupled. In Fig. 8D,
SO could be generated in cell 1 after coupling, even though
cell 1 is by itself SS/R (Fig. 8E); also cell 2 became SS/SO
instead of SS alone. Note that because the cells are standard
⫽ 1.2 mS/cm2, the results of Fig. 8E already
cells with gCa_l
have been summarized in Fig. 5.

it

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF INFERIOR OLIVARY NEURONS

811

FIG. 8. Oscillatory response of cell 1 as a function of the
⫽ 1.2 mS/cm2 and
input current in cell 2, Iapp2, and gc (gCa_l
⫽ 0 ␮A/cm2). A: response domains. Note the existence
Iapp1
of 2 domains where the cell did not oscillate. B–E: mem-
brane potentials of the 2 cells were plotted for in both
⫽
noncoupled (C and E) and coupled (B and D) case (gc
⫽ ⫺1 ␮A/cm2 and
0.05 mS/cm2) for 2 values of Iapp2 (Iapp2
⫽ ⫺4 ␮A/cm2). Subplot names B–E correspond to the
Iapp2
4 asterisks in A. Thin line: somatic membrane potential of
cell 1. Thick line: somatic membrane potential of cell 2. B:
⫽ ⫺4.0
Iapp2
⫽
␮A/cm2, gc
⫽ 0.0 mS/cm2.
0.05 mS/cm2; E: Iapp2
Other details as in Fig. 3.

⫽ 0.05 mS/cm2; C: Iapp2

⫽ ⫺1 0.0 ␮A/cm2, gc

⫽ ⫺4.0 ␮A/cm2, gc

⫽ 0.0 mS/cm2; D: Iapp2

⫽ ⫺1.0 ␮A/cm2, gc

RESPONSES TO CURRENT PULSES IN SIMULATED HARMALINE
APPLICATION CONDITIONS. The drug harmaline is known to
induce very robust somatic spiking in IO cells via three phar-
macological effects (Llina´s and Yarom 1986): it increases the
voltage sensitivity of the conductance of the low-threshold
calcium current, it hyperpolarizes the cell, and it reduces the
anomalous rectiﬁcation. In simulations, we approximated the
increase in voltage sensitivity of the ICa_l conductance by
increasing gCa_l, the hyperpolarizing effect by injecting a tonic
hyperpolarizing current in the soma, and the reduction in Ih by
⫽
decreasing gh. Thus we set gCa_l
⫽ 0.7 mS/cm2 (also we further
Iapp2
increased gNa to 80 mS/cm2 to ensure robust spiking).5 The

⫽ ⫺0.8 ␮m/cm2, and gh

⫽ 1.2 mS/cm2, Iapp1

5 Harmaline shifts the inactivation curve of the low threshold calcium
currents to the right (Llina´s and Yarom 1986). In the present model, we chose
to simulate the modulatory action by adjusting the maximal conductances only,
in order not to increase the parameter search space. We did however run

cells exhibited strong and robust spontaneous somatic spiking
with this set of parameters.

After gc ﬁrst was set to 0.03 mS/cm2, a small dendritic pulse
was applied to cell 1 (0.1 ␮A/cm2 for 1 ms). The cells then
exhibited nonsynchronous, complex ﬁring patterns, as shown
in Fig. 9A. The disparity between the membrane potentials was
due to the occurrence of a somatic spike in one cell just before
the other cell was to spike. The current ﬂowing from the
leading cell to the lagging cell had an effect strong enough to
trigger a dendritic spike in the lagging cell (as seen at about t ⫽
0.6 s). As a result, a few nonsynchronous somatic spikes
followed in both cells. When the somatic spikes were sufﬁ-
ciently close to each other again, a new dendritic spike was
generated in the lagging cell (as seen around t ⫽ 2.5 s in Fig.
9A), thereby maintaining the complex spiking pattern. The

preliminary simulations which showed that shifting the inactivation function of
ICa_l to the right by 5 mV also reproduced robust somatic spiking.

812

N. SCHWEIGHOFER, K. DOYA, AND M. KAWATO

⫽ 0.03 mS/cm2, gCa_l

FIG. 9. Responses of coupled spiking cells in 2 conditions.
At t ⫽ 0.5 s, a depolarizing pulse was given to the dendrite of
cell 1 for symmetry breaking. A: complex desynchronized
⫽ 1.2
ﬁring patterns obtained for gc
⫽
mS/cm2, gh
⫽ ⫺0.8 ␮m/cm2. B: anti-phasic spiking patterns for
Iapp2
⫽
same parameters as in A, except gCa_l
0.01 mS/cm2. For a better visualization of the desynchroni-
zation, we plotted cell 1’s somatic membrane potential vs. cell
2’s potential of for the complex ﬁring pattern case (C) for the
anti-phasic case (D).

⫽ 80 mS/cm2, and Iapp1

⫽ 0.7 mS/cm2, gNa

⫽ 1.5 mS/cm2 and gc

nonsynchronous ﬁring can be better visualized by plotting the
membrane potential of cell 1 as a function of the membrane
potential of cell 2, as in Fig. 9C.

For gc

⫽ 0.01 mS/cm2 and with a further increase in the
⫽ 1.5 mS/cm2), the cells exhibited
strength of ICa_l (gCa_l
anti-phasic ﬁring (Fig. 9B). Interestingly, anti-phasic so-
matic ﬁring has been reported in the IO cells by Llina´s and
Yarom (1986; see their Fig. 5E). Plotting the membrane
potential of one cell as a function of the membrane potential
of the other reveals the precise periodicity of this spiking
pattern (Fig. 9D).

MODULATION OF BOTH COUPLING STRENGTH AND IONIC
CURRENTS IN SIMULATED HARMALINE APPLICATION. Here we
show that, in addition to the coupling conductance, the maxi-
mal conductance values of both ICa_l and Ih have key roles in
the appearance of complex, desynchronized ﬁring patterns. In
Fig. 10A, the distance D between the two cells is plotted as a
function of both gCa_l and gc. The contour D ⫽ 2 mV approx-
imately corresponds to the appearance of a signiﬁcant phase
shift. The contour D ⫽ 8 mV corresponds to the induction of
desynchronizing dendritic spikes by the current ﬂowing

through the gap junction (as in Fig. 9A).6 Very weak coupling
⬍ 0.003 mS/cm2) had no effect on the phase relationship of
(gc
the spiking cells. For a large range of intermediate coupling
values (gc between 0.003 and 0.15 mS/cm2), spiking was
⬎ 0.2
complex. Only very large coupling conductances (gc
mS/cm2) brought the two cells into the in-phase mode. Because
these large values are probably not biologically plausible (see
DISCUSSION), complex ﬁring behavior occurred for almost the
whole physiological range of gc. The range of gCa_l for which
ﬁring is complex was 1.15–1.4 mS/cm2. This range should be
compared with the spontaneous somatic spiking domain: if
gCa_l was ⬍0.9 mS/cm2 only subthreshold oscillations were
observed, and if gCa_l was ⬎1.6 mS/cm2, only spontaneous
dendritic spiking were observed. Thus desynchronization oc-

6 This value might appear small compared with spike amplitudes. However,
since the maximal ﬁring rate is low (around 3– 4 spikes per s) and since a
sodium spike lasts only a very short time (in the order of 2–3 ms), the two
desynchronized cells have similar, hyperpolarized, membrane potentials most
of the time. During these relatively long-lasting common hyperpolarized
phases, the instantaneous distance is small; this explains the small values of the
distance, which was temporally averaged over long duration, compared with
the spike amplitudes.

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF INFERIOR OLIVARY NEURONS

813

FIG. 10. A: average distance between the 2 cells’
membrane potentials as function of both gCa_l and gc.
Contours where the distance D is 2 mV and 8 mV are
shown (D ⫽ 2 mV approximately corresponds to the
appearance of a signiﬁcant phase shift; D ⫽ 8 mV
corresponds to the induction of desynchronizing den-
dritic spikes by the current ﬂowing through the gap
junction). The point labeled “a” corresponds to the stan-
dard cell under harmaline condition (Fig. 9A) and the
point labeled “b” to the anti-phase regime (Fig. 9B).
Note how increasing both ionic and coupling conduc-
tances tends to desynchronize the cells. B: Distance
between the two cells as function of both gh and gc. As
above, very weak coupling had no effect, but for stron-
ger coupling values ﬁring became complex and the two
cells were desynchronized.

curred for more than a third of gCa_l values for which somatic
spikes were observed.

In Fig. 10B, the distance D between the two cells is plotted
as a function of both gh and gc. As in the preceding text, very
weak coupling had no effect, but for stronger coupling values
ﬁring became complex, and the two cells were desynchronized.
The spiking was complex and desynchronized for a very large
range of gc, i.e., 0.005– 0.14 mS/cm2 and when gh was in the
0.4- to 1-mS/cm2 range. Thus desynchronization occurred for
more than a fourth of possible gh values. Note that the SS
domain was limited to 2.45 mS/cm2 ⬎ gh
⬎ 0.25 mS/cm2:
between 0.25 and 0.15 S/cm2 spontaneous dendritic spiking
occurred; ⬍0.15 mS/cm2 the cells were in a hyperpolarized
steady state; and ⬎2.45 mS/cm2 only subthreshold oscillations
were observed. For values of gh between 0.25 and 0.40 mS/
cm2, while one cell is hyperpolarized after a dendritic spike,
the other cell could not generate a somatic spike because the
depolarization induced by the h current was weak compared
with the hyperpolarizing coupling current. The cells generate a
nearly simultaneous somatic spike at the end of the AHP.
Therefore in this particular case, dendritic spikes do not lead to
signiﬁcant desynchronization.

D I S C U S S I O N

We propose a novel two-compartment biophysical model of
IO neurons that reproduced many reported experimental re-
sults. The modeled neurons exhibited multiple ﬁring patterns
that depended on the level of depolarization or hyperpolariza-
tion, on the relative inﬂuence of the ionic currents ICa_l and Ih,
and on the strength of the electrotonic coupling.

Comparison with related modeling studies

of several neurons which contain active dendrites (Booth et al.
1997; Mainen and Sejnowski 1996; Pinsky and Rinzel 1994;
Rush and Rinzel 1994). The second compartment, correspond-
ing to the lumped dendrites, allowed us to segregate the soma
from the dendritic location of the high-threshold calcium cur-
rent, the gap junctions, and the synaptic inputs. The morpho-
logical parameters gint and p were critical to the behaviors of
the two-compartment model. When the coupling conductance
between the two compartment gint was set to large values (in
effect lumping the somatic and dendritic compartments into 1
isopotential compartment), simulations showed that it was im-
possible to generate somatic spikes: the sodium spikes always
triggered dendritic spikes. We found that, for proper function-
ing of the model gint must be set to ⬍0.2 mS/cm2. Moreover,
because it is reasonable to assume that intracellular coupling
⬍
(gint) is stronger than intercellular coupling (gc), we have gc
⬍ 0.2 mS/cm2 (see Table 2 for plausible ranges of param-
gint
eters inferred from simulations). In the present model, p ⫽ 0.2
was used for the ratio of the somatic area to the total surface
area. In two compartment models, it is difﬁcult, however, to
relate directly p to the actual cell morphology due to the
attenuation of the current ﬂowing from distal dendrites to the

TABLE 2. Plausible ranges of several parameters inferred from
simulations

Parameter

p
gint, mS/cm2
gc, mS/cm2
gCa_l, mS/cm2
gh, mS/cm2

Range

0.2–0.3
0.08–0.2
⬍ gint
gc
0.5–1.5

1–2

Two-compartment models similar to the one described here
were shown to reproduce successfully many cellular responses

Note how the ranges for the ﬁrst four parameters have been reduced

compared with Table 1.

814

N. SCHWEIGHOFER, K. DOYA, AND M. KAWATO

soma (Pinsky and Rinzel 1994). Thus p should be larger than
the actual morphological ratio (0.1– 0.2) (Manor 1995).

In the present study, the calcium dynamics and the kinetics
of the ICa_h and IK_Ca currents were borrowed from Traub et
al.’s (1991) CA3 hippocampal pyramidal neuron model. These
kinetics lead to satisfactory performance of our IO model
because most of the results of the present study are in agree-
ment with experimental observations. It is possible, however,
that the very low ﬁring frequency of IO neurons in vivo is due
to a longer lasting AHP than in the model (⬃350 ms when no
tonic current is injected). When we used the following calcium
dynamics equation (instead of Traub et al.’s)

d关Ca2⫹兴

dt

⫽ ⫺1.0ICa_h ⫺ 0.02关Ca2⫹兴

then IK_Ca was activated for a longer period and created an
AHP that lasts ⬃700 ms (same experimental conditions as in
Fig. 2). Thus the maximal ﬁring rate of the cell would be ⬃1.4
spikes/s, in line with in vivo data (at most 2 or 3 spikes within
a second).

To our knowledge, the model developed by Manor (1995)
and Manor et al. (1997) is the only other published model of IO
neurons. Their study focused on the subthreshold oscillations,
so their model contained only ICa_l and a leakage current
(because these 2 currents are sufﬁcient to generate subthresh-
old oscillations). These authors notably showed that when two
nonidentical cells were coupled, oscillations could be gener-
ated even though neither of the individual cells was a sponta-
neous oscillator. For example, the two cells shown in Fig. 8B
did not oscillate when they were not coupled because the ﬁrst
cell was too depolarized and the second cell was too hyperpo-
⫽ 0.05 mS/cm2), however, the
larized. When coupled (with gc
two cells oscillated at the same frequency, but at different
baselines and with a small phase shift. Moreover, if one cell
started spiking, the oscillations in the other cell increased in
amplitude.

Our model signiﬁcantly extends the Manor et al. model,
however, because we incorporated sodium spikes, dendritic
spikes, and AHP. Thus we could investigate the conditions of
IO spike generation when input current, electrical coupling
strength, and the conductances of both ICa_l and Ih were varied.
We further showed that a two-cell network model can exhibit
anti-phase spiking (as previously found in simple models of
coupled neurons) (e.g., Abarbanel et al. 1996; Kawato et al.
1979; Sherman and Rinzel 1992) and complex, desynchronized
ﬁring patterns (also observed in the model of Abarbanel et al.
1996). In the present model, the crucial and novel element is
the triggering of dendritic spikes by electrical coupling leading
to desynchronization. Our results suggest that this behavior is
robust because it can be attained for a large range of coupling
and ionic conductances.

Finally, our two-compartment model is complex enough to
reproduce the essential properties of IO cells, such as the
generation of dendritic and somatic spikes, but computation-
ally simple enough to be later integrated into models of larger
networks. Moreover, realistic, time varying inputs could be
provided to the IO network by incorporating it into a complete
sensorimotor neural system (see Schweighofer et al. 1998).

Ionic current modulation—rhythmicity in single inferior olive
cell

As previously described in experiments (Lampl and Yarom
1988; Llina´s and Yarom 1986) and in the model of Manor et al.
(1997), simulations showed that the low-threshold calcium
current had a central role in generating rhythmic behavior. If
the maximal conductance of ICa_l was below a threshold value,
then spontaneous subthreshold oscillations did not occur re-
gardless of the input current. Small changes in gCa_l, around the
standard cell’s parameter had dramatic effects on the cell
excitability pattern (R, SO, or SS) as shown in Figs. 5 and 6.
Depending on the brain slice, or even depending on the cell
impaled, IO neurons recorded in vitro exhibit a variety of
responses to the same stimulus, and some cells are more
excitable than others. Our results show that even a relatively
narrow distribution of gCa_l in real IO neurons can explain the
diversity of responses encountered. Figures 4 and 5 suggest
two new experiments to test further the effect of the low-
threshold calcium current in single cells, i.e., cells grown in
culture or isolated (this only will be feasible when speciﬁc gap
junctions blockers become available). In these experiments,
both the low-threshold calcium conductance and the injected
tonic current are controlled independently. In the ﬁrst experi-
ment (Fig. 4), starting from rest at the depolarized level, a very
slow continuous decrease in the injected tonic current ﬁrst
would produce subthreshold oscillations of increasing ampli-
tudes, then oscillations of decreasing amplitudes, then rest
again. In a second experiment (Fig. 5), if the maximal conduc-
tance gCa_l is increased (by harmaline for instance), the se-
quence of responses to decreasing injected current then would
be: subthreshold oscillations of
increasing amplitudes at
slightly hyperpolarized membrane potential, then spontaneous
somatic spiking, and ﬁnally rest again for large hyperpolarizing
currents.

Our results indicate that the anomalous rectiﬁer current Ih
plays a major role in controlling the frequency of the oscilla-
tory behavior and the generation of IO somatic spikes. This is
consistent with the observations of Bal and McCormick
(1997). ICa_l and Ih play antagonistic roles: while an increase in
gCa_l makes the cell more excitable (Fig. 6), a decrease in gh
has similar effects (Fig. 7E). The effect of the anomalous
rectiﬁer could be tested by controlling simultaneously the
conductance of Ih (with serotonin and/or Tris artiﬁcial cere-
brospinal ﬂuid) (see Bleasel and Pettigrew 1994) and the
membrane potentials. For example, an experiment designed to
follow a path at a ﬁxed membrane potential similar to
A3 B3 C3 D in Fig. 7 could be performed.

In the present model, the frequency of all oscillations are
voltage dependent. In agreements with our model, the results of
Llina´s and Yarom (1986) and of Bal and McCormick (1997)—
see their Fig. 2—seem to indicate that somatic spiking oscil-
lations are voltage dependent. However, the spontaneous sub-
threshold oscillations, in slices where they occur, are voltage
independent (Lampl and Yarom 1997; Llina´s and Yarom
1986). Part of the discrepancy between our results and these
experimental results may be due to network oscillations as
opposed to cellular oscillations. Lampl and Yarom (1997)
showed that the pattern of subthreshold oscillations is network
speciﬁc rather than cell speciﬁc. Thus injection of current in
one cell does not change its oscillatory frequency. Only when

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF INFERIOR OLIVARY NEURONS

815

an experimental method is available to isolate a single IO cell,
will it be possible to analyze the voltage dependency of sub-
threshold oscillations in single cells, as predicted here.

Inﬂuence of coupling and current modulation—synchrony
and desynchrony of inferior olive cells

Even though gap junction coupling generally is thought to
bring the membrane potential of the two coupled cells closer to
each other, we found that, counterintuitively, increasing cou-
pling strength can desynchronize the two spiking cells. If a
somatic spike occurred in one cell, a dendritic spike in a
coupled cell could be triggered by the current ﬂowing through
the gap junctions. Thus under certain conditions, it appears that
electrical coupling may induce effects that are similar to those
induced by chemical synapses, that is, they may trigger den-
dritic spikes. In addition, the long AHP after the dendritic
spikes increased the complexity of the ﬁring pattern. Desyn-
chronization is robust because there were broad ranges of
electrotonic coupling strengths and maximal conductances,
gCa_l and gh where desynchronization was observed. Moreover,
we veriﬁed that desynchronization does not critically depend
on the voltage dependency of the coupling conductance: Linear
electrical coupling conductances also can desynchronize the
cells (however, because of the stronger overall effect of linear
coupling, the range of gc where desynchronization was ob-
served is smaller). Note that the occurrence of complex ﬁring
behavior by a reduction of gh can be understood by the fact that
a reduction of Ih decreases the electrotonic distance between
the soma and the dendrites, which,
increases the
inﬂuence of a somatic spike in one cell on the dendritic
compartment of another cell.

in turn,

It might appear puzzling that because a somatic spike in the
leading cell (or cell 1) triggers a dendritic spike in the lagging cell
(cell 2), electrical coupling fails to trigger a dendritic spike in cell
1 as well. However, a close inspection of the currents ﬂowing into
and out of the two dendritic compartments reveals the following.
The cell 1’s somatic spike propagates in the dendrite and in turn
slightly raises the membrane potential of cell 2. If this happens
simultaneously with a rise in the dendritic membrane potential of
cell 2 due to the propagation of cell 2’s somatic spike, the
combined effect is sufﬁcient to trigger a dendritic ICa_h spike in
cell 2. This, in turn, creates a relatively large current ﬂow through
the electrical coupling. However, the somatic spike of cell 1 has
already activated the ICa_h current to some extent (but not suff-
iently to generate a spike), which in turns lead to some activation
of IK_Ca. This later current counterbalances the depolarizing effect
of the coupling current: As a consequence, no dendritic spike is
generated in cell 1.

To test the effect of coupling on the synchronization, we
propose the following experiment: two electrodes could be
inserted into two neighboring olivary cells after harmaline
application. Because inhibitory inputs from the cerebellar nu-
clei can decrease signiﬁcantly the gap junction coupling
strength (Lang et al. 1996), excitation or inhibition of deep
nuclear cells that project to this region of the IO could be used
to control the coupling conductance. We predict that, depend-
ing on the electrical coupling strength, the two recorded cells
could be in-phase, phase-shifted, anti-phase, or desynchro-
nized.

Our results imply that neuromodulatory inputs to the IO that

induce relatively small changes in ionic conductances may
bring IO cells into spontaneous rhythmic ﬁring modes and
allow neighboring IO cells to be desynchronized. Indeed, se-
rotonin, released by the raphe nucleus, has been shown to have
effects very similar to those of harmaline on IO cellular be-
havior (even though its mode of actions may be different)
(Sugihara et al. 1995). Thus it is possible that our results under
simulated harmaline application apply to serotonin neuro-
modulation. First, because only a slight increase in gCa_l allows
spontaneous rhythmic somatic spiking (at least at slightly hy-
perpolarized membrane potentials), IO cells could be exquis-
itely sensitive to serotonin: by increasing the voltage sensitivity
of ICa_l, serotonin may allow the control of repetitive spiking.
Second, because anomalous rectiﬁcation is reduced by seroto-
nin (Sugihara et al. 1995), it is possible that Ih plays a central
role, along with ICa_l, in controlling whether the mode of IO
cell ﬁring is rhythmic or not in vivo. Moreover, as shown in
Fig. 10, both an increase in ICa_l strength and a decrease in Ih
strength would make the desynchronization process more
likely. This prediction could be tested experimentally by re-
cording two neighboring IO cells and by simultaneously con-
trolling the serotonin level.

A P P E N D I X

The kinetics equation for the activation and inactivation variables h,

n, k, l, q, and r is

dx
dt

⫽ 关x⬁共V兲 ⫺ x兴/␶共V兲

Mathematical descriptions of the activation and inactivation functions
and their time dependence are given by the following equations.

INa

Adapted from Rush and Rinzel (1994).

m⬁共V兲 ⫽

␣m共V兲

␣m共V兲 ⫹ ␤m共V兲 with ␣m共V兲 ⫽

0.1共V ⫹ 41兲

1 ⫺ exp关⫺共V ⫹ 41兲/10兴

and ␤m共V兲 ⫽ 9.0 exp关⫺共V ⫹ 66兲/20兴

h⬁共V兲 ⫽

␣h共V兲

␣h共V兲 ⫹ ␤h共V兲

␶h共V兲 ⫽

170

␣h共V兲 ⫹ ␤h共V兲

with ␣h共V兲 ⫽ 5.0 exp关⫺共V ⫹ 60兲/15兴

and ␤h共V兲 ⫽

共V ⫹ 50兲

1 ⫺ exp关⫺共V ⫹ 50兲/10兴

IK_dr

Adapted from Rush and Rinzel (1994).

n⬁共V兲 ⫽

␣n共V兲

␣n共V兲 ⫹ ␤n共V兲

␶n共V兲 ⫽

5

␣n共V兲 ⫹ ␤n共V兲

共V ⫹ 41兲

with ␣n共V兲 ⫽

1 ⫺ exp关⫺共V ⫹ 41兲/10兴
and ␤n共V兲 ⫽ 12.5 exp关⫺共V ⫹ 51兲/80兴

ICa_l

Adapted from Manor (1995).

k⬁共V兲 ⫽

1

1 ⫹ exp关⫺共V ⫹ 61兲/4.2兴

␶k ⫽ 5

816

l⬁共V兲 ⫽

Ih

Adapted from Huguenard and McCormick (1992).

q⬁共V兲 ⫽

1

1 ⫹ exp关共v ⫹ 75兲/5.5兴

␶q(V) ⫽

exp共⫺0.086V ⫺ 14.6兲 ⫹ exp共0.07V ⫺ 1.87兲

1

ICa_h

Adapted from Traub et al. (1991).

r⬁共V兲 ⫽

␣r共V兲

␣r共V兲 ⫹ ␤r共V兲

␶r共V兲 ⫽

1

␣r共V兲 ⫹ ␤r共V兲

with ␣r共V兲 ⫽

1.6

1 ⫹ exp关⫺共V ⫺ 5兲/14兴

and ␤r(V) ⫽

0.02共V ⫹ 8.5兲

1 ⫺ exp关共V ⫹ 8.5兲/5兴

IK_Ca

Adapted from Traub et al. (1991).

s⬁共关Ca2⫹兴兲 ⫽

␣s共关Ca2⫹兴兲

␣s共关Ca2⫹兴兲 ⫹ ␤s

␶s共关Ca2⫹兴兲 ⫽

1

␣s共关Ca2⫹兴兲 ⫹ ␤s

with ␣s共关Ca2⫹兴兲 ⫽ min 共210⫺5关Ca2⫹兴, 0.01兲

and ␤s ⫽ 0.015
The kinetics of the inactivation variable s of IK_Ca is given by

ds
dt

⫽ 关s⬁共关Ca2⫹兴兲 ⫺ s兴/␶s共关Ca2⫹兴兲

In the dendritic compartment, the calcium concentration (assuming no
calcium diffusion between compartments) follows the equation

d关Ca2⫹兴

dt

⫽ ⫺3.0ICa_h ⫺ 0.075关Ca2⫹兴

Ic

Adapted from Moreno et al. (1994).

f共V兲 ⫽ 0.6 exp冉 ⫺

502冊 ⫹ 0.4

V2

The authors thank the anonymous referees for valuable comments and

criticisms.

XPPAUT3.0 is available from http://www.pitt.edu/⬃phase. AUTO is avail-
able from http://indy.cs.concordia.ca/auto/. CVODE is available from http://
www.netlib.org/ode/cvode.tar.gz.

Address for reprint requests: N. Schweighofer, ERATO, Kawato Dynamic
Brain Project, 2–2, Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0288, Japan.

Received 10 December 1998; accepted in ﬁnal form 12 April 1999.

REFERENCES

ABARBANEL, H.D.I., HUERTA, R., RABINOVITCH, M. I., RULKOV, N. F., ROWAT,
P. F., AND SELVERSTON, A. I. Synchronized action of synaptically coupled
chaotic model of neurons. Neural Comp. 8: 1567–1602, 1996.

BAL, T. AND MCCORMICK, D. A. Synchronized oscillations in the inferior olive
are controlled by the hyperpolarization-activated cation current Ih. J. Neu-
rophysiol. 77: 3145–3156, 1997.

BENARDO, L. S. AND FOSTER, R. E. Oscillatory behavior in inferior olive
neurons: mechanism, modulation, cell aggregates. Brain Res. Bull. 17:
773–784, 1986.

N. SCHWEIGHOFER, K. DOYA, AND M. KAWATO

1

1 ⫹ exp关共V ⫹ 85.5兲/8.5兴

␶l共V兲 ⫽

20 exp关共V ⫹ 160兲30兴
1 ⫹ exp关共V ⫹ 84兲/7.3兴

⫹ 35

BENNETT, M.V.L. AND VERSEDIS, V. K. Biophysics of gap junctions. Semin.

Cell. Biol. 3: 29 – 47, 1992.

BLEASEL, A. F. AND PETTIGREW, A. G. The effect of bicarbonate free artiﬁcial
cerebrospinal ﬂuid on spontaneous oscillations of the membrane potential in
inferior olivary neurons of the rat. Brain Res. 639: 8 –20, 1994.

BOOTH, V., RINZEL, J., AND KIEHN, O. Compartmental model of vertebrate
motorneurons for Ca2⫹-dependent spiking and plateau potentials under
pharmacological treatment. J. Neurophysiol. 78: 3371–3385, 1997.

COHEN, S. D. AND HINDMARSH, A. C. CVODE User Guide. Lawrence Lever-

more National Laboratory, 1997.

CONDORELLI, D. F., PARENTI, R., SPINELLA, F., SALINARO, A. T., BELLUARDO,
N., CARDILE, V., AND CICIRATA, F. Cloning of a new gap junction gene
(Cx36) highly expressed in mammalian brain neurons. Eur. J. Neurosci. 10:
1202– 8, 1998.

DE ZEEUW, C. I., HOLSTEGE, J. C., RUIGROK, T. J., AND VOOGD, J. Ultrastruc-
tural study of the GABAergic, cerebellar, and mesodiencephalic innervation
of the cat medial accessory olive: anterograde tracing combined with im-
munocytochemistry. J. Comp. Neurol. 284: 12–35, 1989.

DE ZEEUW, C. I., LANG, E. J., SUGIHARA, I., RUIGROK, T. J., EISENMAN, L. M.,
MUGNAINI, E., AND LLINAS, R. Morphological correlates of bilateral syn-
chrony in the rat cerebellar cortex. J. Neurosci. 16: 3412–3426, 1996.

DE ZEEUW, C. I., SIMPSON, J. I., HOOGENRAAD, C. C., GALJART, N., KOEKKOEK,
S. K., AND RUIGROK, T. J. Microcircuitry and function of the inferior olive.
Trends Neurosci. 21: 391– 400, 1998.

DOEDEL, E. J. AUTO: a program for the automatic bifurcation analysis of
autonomous systems. Proceedings of the 10th Manitoba Conference on
Numerical Mathematics and Computation. Winnipeg: University of Mani-
toba, 1981, p. 265–284.

ERMENTROUT, B. XPPAUT3.0 —The Differential Equations Toll. University of

Pittsburgh, 1997.

HUGUENARD, J. R. AND MCCORMICK, D. A. Simulation of the currents involved
in rhythmic oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 68:
1373–1383, 1992.

KAWATO, M., SOKABE, M., AND SUZUKI, R. Synergism and antagonism of

neurons caused by an electrical synapse. Biol. Cybern. 34: 81– 89, 1979.

KEATING, J. G. AND THACH, W. T. Non-clock behavior of inferior olive
neurons: interspike interval of Purkinje cell complex spike discharge in
the awake behaving monkey is random. J. Neurophysiol. 73: 1329 –1340,
1995.

KITAZAWA, S., KIMURA, T., AND YIN, P. B. Cerebellar complex spikes encode
both destinations and errors in arm movements. Nature 392: 494 – 497,
1998.

KOBAYASHI, Y., KAWANO, K., TAKEMURA, A., INOUE, Y., KITAMA, T., GOMI, H.,
AND KAWATO, M. Temporal ﬁring patterns of Purkinje cells in the cerebellar
ventral paraﬂocullus during ocular following responses in monkeys. II.
Complex spikes. J. Neurophysiol. 80: 832– 848, 1998.

KOGAN, A. AND YAROM, Y. Electrotonic coupling in inferior olivary neurons

revealed by direct measurements. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 507: 5, 1997.

LAMPL, I. AND YAROM, Y. Subthreshold oscillations and resonant behavior:
two manifestations of the same mechanism. Neuroscience 78: 325–341,
1997.

LANG, E. J., SUGIHARA, I., AND LLIN´AS, R. GABAergic modulation of complex
spike activity by the cerebellar nucleoolivary pathway in the rat. J. Neuro-
physiol. 76: 255–275, 1996.

LLIN´AS, R., BAKER, R., AND SOTELO, C. Electrotonic coupling between neurons

in cat inferior olive. J. Neurophysiol. 37: 560 –571, 1974.

LLIN´AS, R. AND YAROM, Y. Electrophysiology of mammalian inferior olivary
neurons in vitro. Different types of voltage-dependent ionic conductances.
J. Physiol. (Lond.) 315: 549 –567, 1981a.

LLIN´AS, R. AND YAROM, Y. Properties and distribution of ionic conductances
generating electroresponsiveness of mammalian inferior olivary neurons in
vitro. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 315: 569 –584, 1981b.

LLIN´AS, R. AND YAROM, Y. Oscillatory properties of guinea pig inferior olivary
neurons and their pharmacology modulation: an in-vitro study. J. Physiol.
(Lond.) 376: 163–182, 1986.

MAINEN, Z. F. AND SEJNOWSKI, T. J. Inﬂuence of dendritic structure on ﬁring

pattern in model neocortical neurons. Nature 382: 363–366, 1996.

MANOR, Y. Construction of an Experimentally Based Neuronal Network Model
to Explore the Function of the Inferior Olive Nucleus (PhD thesis). Jerusa-
lem, Israel: Hebrew University, 1995.

MANOR, Y., RINZEL, J., SEGEV, I., AND YAROM, Y. Low-amplitude oscillations
in the inferior olive: a model based on electrical coupling of neurons with
heterogeneous channel densities. J. Neurophysiol. 77: 2736 –2752, 1997.

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF INFERIOR OLIVARY NEURONS

817

MORENO, A. P., ROOK, M. B., FISHMA, G. I., AND SPRAY, D. C. Gap junction
channels: distinct voltage-sensitive and -insensitive conductances states.
Biophys. J. 67: 113–119, 1994.

PINSKY, P. F. AND RINZEL, J. Intrinsic and network rhythmogenesis in a reduced

Traub model for CA3 neurons. J. Comp. Neurosci. 1: 39 – 60, 1994.

RINZEL, J. AND ERMENTROUT, G. B. Analysis of neural excitability and oscil-
lations. In: Methods in Neuronal Modeling, edited by C. Koch and I. Segev.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1989, p. 135–170.

RUIGROK, T. J. AND VOOGD, J. Cerebellar inﬂuence on olivary excitability in

the cat. Eur. J. Neurosci. 7: 679 – 693, 1995.

RUSH, M. E. AND RINZEL, J. Analysis of bursting in a thalamic neuron model.

Biol. Cybern. 71: 281–284, 1994.

SASAKI, K., BOWER, J. M., AND LLIN´AS, R. Multiple Purkinje cell recording in

rodent cerebellar cortex. Eur. J. Neurosci. 1: 572–586, 1989.

SCHWEIGHOFER, N., SPOELSTRA, J., ARBIB, M. A., AND KAWATO, M. Role of the
cerebellum in reaching movements in humans. II. A neural model of the
intermediate cerebellum. Eur. J. Neurosci. 10: 95–105, 1998.

SHERMAN, A. AND RINZEL, J. Rhythmogenic effects of weak electrotonic
coupling in neuronal models. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89: 2471–2474,
1992.

SIMPSON, J. I., WYLIE, D. R., AND DE ZEEUW, C. I. On climbing ﬁber functions

and their consequences. Behav. Brain Sci. 19: 384 –398, 1996.

SOTELO, C., LLIN´AS, R., AND BAKER, R. Structural study of inferior olivary
nucleus of the cat: morphological correlates of electrotonic coupling. J. Neu-
rophysiol. 37: 541–559, 1974.

SUGIHARA, I., LANG, E. J., AND LLIN´AS, R. Serotonin modulation of inferior
olivary oscillations and synchronicity: a multiple-electrode study in the rat
cerebellum. Eur. J. Neurosci. 7: 521–534, 1995.

TRAUB, R. D., WONG, R.K.S., MILES, R., AND MICHELSON, H. A model of a
CA3 hippocampal pyramidal neuron incorporating voltage-clamp data on
intrinsic conductances. J. Neurophysiol. 66: 635– 650, 1991.

WEISS, M. AND PELLET, J. Raphe-cerebellum interactions. II. Effects of mid-
brain raphe stimulation and harmaline administration on single unit activity
of cerebellar cortical cells in the rat. Exp. Brain Res. 48: 171–176, 1982.
YAROM Y. Rhythmogenesis in a hybrid system—interconnecting an olivary
neuron to an analog network of coupled oscillators. Neuroscience 44:
263–275, 1991.

YAROM, Y. AND LLIN´AS, R. Long term modiﬁability of anomalous and delayed
rectiﬁcation in guinea pig inferior olivary neurons. J. Neurosci. 7: 1166 –
1177, 1987.

