The Journal of Neuroscience, April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976

Activity Patterns in a Model for the Subthalamopallidal Network of
the Basal Ganglia

D. Terman,1 J. E. Rubin,2 A. C. Yew,1 and C. J. Wilson3
1Department of Mathematics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, 2Department of Mathematics, The
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, and 3Division of Life Sciences, University of Texas at San
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78249

Based on recent experimental data, we have developed a
conductance-based computational network model of the sub-
thalamic nucleus and the external segment of the globus pal-
lidus in the indirect pathway of the basal ganglia. Computer
simulations and analysis of this model illuminate the roles of the
coupling architecture of the network, and associated synaptic
conductances, in modulating the activity patterns displayed by
this network. Depending on the relationships of these coupling
parameters, the network can support three general classes of
sustained ﬁring patterns: clustering, propagating waves, and
repetitive spiking that may show little regularity or correlation.
Each activity pattern can occur continuously or in discrete
episodes. We characterize the mechanisms underlying these
rhythms, as well as the inﬂuence of parameters on details such

as spiking frequency and wave speed. These results suggest
that the subthalamopallidal circuit is capable both of correlated
rhythmic activity and of irregular autonomous patterns of ac-
tivity that block rhythmicity. Increased striatal
input to, and
weakened intrapallidal
inhibition within, the indirect pathway
can switch the behavior of the circuit from irregular to rhythmic.
This may be sufﬁcient to explain the emergence of correlated
oscillatory activity in the subthalamopallidal circuit after de-
struction of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson’s disease and
in animal models of parkinsonism.

Key words: basal ganglia; subthalamic nucleus; globus palli-
dus; computational models; oscillations; synchrony; Parkinson’s
disease

Most current models of the basal ganglia are static models, in that
they represent the inputs and outputs of the component nuclei as
ﬁring rates. For example, the Albin et al. (1989) model, com-
monly used to explain the symptoms of Parkinsonism, views the
interactions of the direct and indirect pathway as constant in time
and explains the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease in terms of
changes in mean rate of the basal ganglia output (Wichmann and
DeLong, 1996). In contrast, recent experimental studies have not
strongly conﬁrmed the predicted changes in mean rate in these
structures under dopamine depletion, but have instead revealed
prominent low-frequency periodicity (4–30 Hz) of ﬁring and
dramatically increased correlations among neurons in the exter-
nal segment of the globus pallidus (GPe) and the subthalamic
nucleus (STN) (Bergman et al., 1994; Nini et al., 1995; Magnin et
al., 2000; Raz et al., 2000; Brown et al., 2001). It is remarkable
that the changes in ﬁring pattern seen in those structures do not
appear to be attributable to comparable changes in the ﬁring
patterns of striatal output cells, although cholinergic striatal in-
terneurons show changes comparable with those seen in the
globus pallidus (Raz et al., 1996). The authors of those studies
have proposed that a rate model of the basal ganglia is inadequate

Received Aug. 21, 2001; revised Jan. 15, 2002; accepted Jan. 23, 2002.

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Grants DMS-
0103822 (D.T., A.C.Y.) and DMS-9804447 (J.E.R.) and National Institutes of
Health, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Grant NS26473
(C.J.W.). We thank Mark Bevan for providing direct access to his data on STN and
GP cell activity.

Correspondence should be addressed to David Terman, Department of Mathe-
matics, The Ohio State University, 231 West 18th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210.
E-mail: terman@math.ohio-state.edu.
Copyright © 2002 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/02/222963-14$15.00/0

to capture the dynamic interaction of the STN and GPe that may
generate these pathological changes.

In particular, such dynamic interactions may lead to oscillatory
activity patterns. Indeed, the connections between GPe and STN
neurons show a number of features common to central pattern
generators, which suggests that these nuclei might together be
capable of self-sustained oscillatory activity. The GPe cells
project to the subthalamus and to other basal ganglia structures
and inhibit the cells in those regions via GABAA-receptor medi-
ated inhibition. In addition, the GPe cells inhibit each other via
recurrent axon collaterals (Stanford and Cooper, 1999; Ogura
and Kita, 2000). Subthalamic cells excite neurons in several basal
ganglia structures, including the GPe (Kitai and Kita, 1987).
Furthermore, these cells show powerful and long-lasting rebound
excitation after episodes of hyperpolarization generated by syn-
aptic inhibition from the GPe (Bevan et al., 2000). These prop-
erties suggest the possibility for oscillatory rhythms in which GPe
neurons are excited by activity in the STN neurons, in turn inhibit
the STN cells, and are again excited by the resulting rebound
excitation of STN cells that follows the inhibition. A mechanism
of this kind has been proposed by Plenz and Kitai (1999) on the
basis of their studies of basal ganglia organotypic tissue cultures.
To explore such dynamic interactions, we have performed
computer simulations of conductance-based models of the sub-
thalamopallidal circuit, within the limits of our knowledge of the
topography of the synaptic connections and the cellular proper-
ties involved. These simulations reveal a wide variety of oscilla-
tory patterns, depending on the arrangements and strengths of
synaptic connections within and between the cellular populations.
We classify these patterns as clustering, propagating waves, and
repetitive spiking (which may show little regularity or correla-

2964 J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

tion); each activity pattern can occur continuously or in discrete
episodes. The mechanisms underlying these patterns can be un-
derstood in terms of the intrinsic properties and synaptic inter-
actions of the cells in our simulations. The network can be
switched from irregular uncorrelated spiking to correlated rhyth-
mic patterns through an increase of incoming striatal input to-
gether with a weakening of intrapallidal inhibition, suggesting
that these changes may underlie the emergence of correlated
rhythmic activity in the subthalamopallidal circuit in pathological
states.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Single-compartment conductance-based biophysical models of cells from
the STN and the GPe were developed, based on recent voltage-clamp and
current-clamp data (Figs. 1, 2). Simulations of these models and of model
networks composed of synaptically coupled STN and GPe cells were
performed using XPPAUT, developed by G. B. Ermentrout and available
at ftp://ftp.math.pitt.edu/pub/bardware. A copy of the XPPAUT ﬁle
containing the models constructed is available from D.T. on request.

STN cells. The STN model includes a set of currents and corresponding
kinetics that are based on recent experimental data (Bevan and Wilson,
1999; Bevan et al., 2000). In particular, the model features spike-
producing currents (IK and INa), a low-threshold T-type Ca 2⫹ current
(IT) and a high-threshold Ca 2⫹ current (IC a) (Song et al., 2000), a
Ca 2⫹-activated, voltage-independent “afterhyperpolarization” K ⫹ cur-
rent (IAHP), and a leak current (IL). The membrane potential of each
STN neuron obeys the current balance equation:

Cm

dv
dt

⫽ ⫺IL ⫺ IK ⫺ INa ⫺ IT ⫺ IC a ⫺ IAHP ⫺ IG3 S .

3 (v)b⬁

b /␴

⫽ gNam⬁

IT

INa
⫽ gC as⬁

X [(X⬁(v) ⫺ X)/␶

3 (v)h(v ⫺ vNa),

⫽ gKn 4(v ⫺ vK),

The leak current is given by IL

IK
2 (r)(v ⫺ vC a), and IC a

⫽ gL(v ⫺ vL), and the other voltage-
dependent currents are described by the Hodgkin–Huxley formalism as
⫽
follows:
2 (v)(v ⫺ vC a). The slowly operating
gTa⬁
gating variables n, h, and r are treated as functions of both time and
voltage and have ﬁrst-order kinetics governed by differential equations of
the form dX/dt ⫽ ␾
X(v)] (where X can be n, h, or r), with
X(v) ⫽ ␶
0 ⫹ ␶
1 /[1 ⫹ exp[⫺(v ⫺ ␪
␶ ]]. Using this formulation,
␶ )/␴
␶
X
X
X
X
activation (and inactivation) time constants have a sigmoidal dependence
on voltage, ␶0/␾ is the minimum, and (␶0 ⫹ ␶1)/␾ is the maximum time
constant. The voltage at which the time constant is midway between its
maximum and minimum values is ␪␶, and ␴␶ is the slope factor for the
voltage dependence of the time constant. Activation gating for the
rapidly activating channels (m, a, and s) was treated as instantaneous. For
all gating variables X ⫽ n, m, h, a, r, or s, the steady-state voltage
dependence was determined using X⬁(v) ⫽ 1/[1 ⫹ exp[⫺(v ⫺ ␪
X]],
where ␪
X is the half activation (or inactivation) voltage for gating
variable X, and ␴
X is the slope factor for that variable. For the T current
inactivation variable b, we used b⬁(r) ⫽ 1/[1 ⫹ exp[(r ⫺ ␪
b]] ⫺ 1/[1 ⫹
exp[⫺␪
b]]. The unusual way of modeling T current inactivation here
[with b⬁(r) instead of simply r] was designed to combine the effects of a
hyperpolarization-activated inward (sag, or H) current with those of a T
current, making the rebound bursts of an STN cell more prominent.
These rebound bursts (see Fig. 1e,f) agree with experimental data (Bevan
and Wilson, 1999; Bevan et al., 2001).

⫺ IT

As the ﬁnal intrinsic current, we take IAHP

⫽ gAHP(v ⫺ vK)([Ca]/
([Ca] ⫹ k1 )) where [Ca], the intracellular concentration of Ca 2⫹ ions, is
governed by [Ca]⬘ ⫽ ⑀(⫺IC a
⫺ kC a[Ca]). The constant ⑀ combines
the effects of buffers, cell volume, the molar charge of calcium, and is in
units of (mole-sec)/(coulombs-liter). The constant k1 is the dissociation
constant of the calcium-dependent AHP current. The constant kC a is the
calcium pump rate constant and is in units of (coulombs-liter)/(moles-
sec). The current IG3 S that represents synaptic input from the GPe to
⫽ gG3 S(v ⫺ vG3 S)⌺sj. The summation is taken
STN is modeled as IG3 S
over the presynaptic GPe neurons, and each synaptic variable sj solves a
ﬁrst-order differential equation s⬘
g )(1 ⫺ sj) ⫺ ␤sj. Here vgj
j
is the membrane potential of the GPe neuron j, and H⬁(v) ⫽ 1/(1 ⫹
exp[⫺(v ⫺ ␪
H)/␴
H]).
g
g

⫽ ␣H⬁(vgj

Parameter values for STN cells used in the simulations are given in
Table 1. The capacitance Cm was normalized to 1 pF/␮m 2. Also note that
we scaled our model such that the currents have units of picoamperes per

⫺ ␪

X)/␴

b)/␴

Table 1. Basic set of parameter values for the conductance-based model
STN cell

Parameter

Value

gL
gK
gNa
gT
gCa
gAHP
vL
vK
vNa
vCa
␶
1
h
␶
1
n
␶
1
r
␶
0
h
␶
0
n
␶
0
r
␾
h
␾
n
␾
r
k1
kCa
⑀
␪
m
␪
h
␪
n
␪
r
␪
a
␪
b
␪
s
␶
␪
h
␶
␪
n
␶
␪
r
␪
H
g
␪
g
␣
vG3 S
␴
m
␴
h
␴
n
␴
r
␴
a
␴
b
␴
s
␶
␴
h
␶
␴
n
␶
␴
r
␴
H
g
␤

2.25 nS/␮m 2
45.0 nS/␮m 2
37.5 nS/␮m 2
0.5 nS/␮m 2
0.5 nS/␮m 2
9.0 nS/␮m 2

⫺60.0 mV
⫺80.0 mV
55.0 mV
140.0 mV
500.0 msec
100.0 msec
17.5 msec
1.0 msec
1.0 msec
40.0 msec
0.75
0.75
0.2
15.0
22.5
3.75 ⫻ 10 ⫺5 msec ⫺1

⫺30.0
⫺39.0
⫺32.0
⫺67.0
⫺63.0
0.4
⫺39.0
⫺57.0
⫺80.0
68.0
⫺39.0
30.0
5.0 msec ⫺1

⫺85.0 mV

15.0
⫺3.1
8.0
⫺2.0
7.8
⫺0.1
8.0
⫺3.0
⫺26.0
⫺2.2
8.0
1.0 msec ⫺1

Parameters in nanosiemans per square micrometer denote maximal conductances of
corresponding currents in the STN current balance equation. Parameters in milli-
volts represent reversal potentials for these currents. Parameters in milliseconds are
time constants relating to the time evolution of the gating variables in the Hodgkin–
Huxley representations of these currents, whereas other parameters are associated
constants.

square micrometer, to be consistent with the data of Bevan and Wilson
(1999) and Bevan et al. (2000).

GPe cells. Our model for single GPe cells is similar in form to that of

the STN neurons. The equation for the GPe neurons is:

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976 2965

Cm

dv
dt

⫽ ⫺IL ⫺ IK ⫺ INa ⫺ IT ⫺ IC a ⫺ IAHP ⫺ IS3 G ⫺ IG3 G ⫹ Iapp ,

Table 2. Basic set of GPe parameter values

Parameter

Value

⫽ gTa⬁

where Iapp represents a constant external applied current. IL, IK
(Baranauskas et al., 1999; Hernandez-Pineda et al., 1999), INa, IC a (Sur-
meier et al., 1994; Stefani et al., 1998), and IAHP are modeled with the
same formulas and equations given above for the STN cells, whereas the
3 (v)r(v ⫺
low-threshold calcium current takes a simpler form: IT
vC a), where r satisﬁes a ﬁrst-order differential equation. Here we assume
r(v) ⬅ ␶
␶
r , a constant. This has the effect of reducing the size of the
posthyperpolarization rebound in GPe cells compared with STN cells.
The experimental literature suggests that the GPe neurons have sim-
ilar ionic currents to STN cells, but in different proportions. Parameter
values for GPe cells used in the simulations are given in Table 2. In
particular, parameters associated with the GPe potassium channels allow
for fast spiking of GPe cells (Hernandez-Pineda et al., 1999); we have not
included a second slowly deactivating component of the potassium cur-
rent (Baranauskas et al., 1999). These parameters were selected to match
the data for spontaneous ﬁring patterns, rebound response to offset of
hyperpolarization, spike frequency adaptation, and frequency–intensity
curves obtained from the study of GPe cells in slices (Kita and Kitai,
1991; Nambu and Llina˜s, 1994; Cooper and Stanford, 2000).

Two different synaptic currents are included in the GPe model. IS3 G
represents excitatory input from the STN, and IG3 G represents the
inhibitory inﬂuence coming from other GPe cells. These are modeled by
the same type of expression as used for IG3 S, with appropriately re-
named synaptic parameters.

The input to the GPe cells from the striatum is represented by a
constant hyperpolarizing current Iapp common to all the GPe cells. This
current is not speciﬁed in Table 2 because in our network simulations it
will be one of the main parameters that we vary. The use of this
unpatterned inhibitory inﬂuence as a parameter was not intended as a
realistic representation of the pattern of activity in the striatopallidal
pathway, but rather as an approximation to the overall effect of greater or
lesser striatal inhibition to the GPe.

Synaptic connectivity. Currently, the details of connections between
STN and GPe cells are poorly understood. It is known that STN neurons
provide one of the largest sources of excitatory input to the globus
pallidus and that the GPe is a major source of inhibitory afferents to the
STN (Kitai and Kita, 1987). However, the spatial distribution of axons in
each pathway, as well as the number of cells innervated by single neurons
in each direction, are not known to the precision required for a computer
model. Some early reports suggested that the STN cells project to the
GPe in a diffuse manner (Hazrati and Parent, 1992), whereas more
recent studies indicate that the two are more tightly interconnected, with
a connectivity that may be precisely topographical (Shink et al., 1996) or
more heterogeneous (Sato et al., 2000). It is certain from the existing
studies that the connection is sparse; that is, each GPe neuron makes
synaptic contacts with few STN neurons and vice versa. But the number
of synapses made by single neurons or the proportion of neurons con-
tacted by an axon within the arborization cannot currently be estimated.
Therefore, we consider multiple architectures based on low numbers of
contacts from STN to GPe cells, from GPe to STN cells, and within the
GPe. In the model networks, each GPe neuron sends inhibition to the
entire GPe population or some part of it, as well as to one or more STN
neurons. Each STN neuron sends excitation to one or more GPe neurons.
The intrinsic parameters associated with the STN and GPe cells are the
same for each simulation; these are the parameter values of the individ-
ual model STN and GPe neurons given in Tables 1 and 2. We used
networks of between 8 and 20 cells of each type for the simulations
described in this paper.

RESULTS
Firing properties of model STN and GPe neurons
The model STN neurons were adjusted to exhibit properties that
are characteristic of the ﬁring of STN neurons in experimental
studies on slices (Bevan and Wilson, 1999; Bevan et al., 2000;
Beurrier et al., 2000). The model neurons are spontaneously
active with a ﬁring rate of ⬃3 Hz. When current is injected, the
cells achieve ﬁring rates on the order of 200 Hz with little change
in the voltage range of the membrane potential traversed by the
action potentials. Figure 1a presents currents generated by

gL
gK
gNa
gT
gCa
gAHP
vL
vK
vNa
vCa
␶
1
h
␶
1
n
␶
0
h
␶
0
n
␶
r
␾
h
␾
n
␾
r
k1
kCa
⑀
␪
m
␪
h
␪
n
␪
r
␪
a
␪
s
␶
␪
h
␶
␪
n
␪
H
g
␪
g
␣
vG3 G
␴
m
␴
h
␴
n
␴
r
␴
a
␴
s
␶
␴
h
␶
␴
n
␴
H
g
␤
vS3 G

0.1 nS/␮m 2
30.0 nS/␮m 2
120.0 nS/␮m 2
0.5 nS/␮m 2
0.15 nS/␮m 2
30.0 nS/␮m 2

⫺55.0 mV
⫺80.0 mV
55.0 mV
120.0 mV

0.27 msec
0.27 msec
0.05 msec
0.05 msec
30.0 msec
0.05
0.05
1.0
30.0
20.0
1 ⫻ 10 ⫺4 msec ⫺1

⫺37.0
⫺58.0
⫺50.0
⫺70.0
⫺57.0
⫺35.0
⫺40.0
⫺40.0
⫺57.0
20.0
2.0 msec ⫺1

⫺100.0 mV

10.0
⫺12.0
14.0
⫺2.0
2.0
2.0
⫺12.0
⫺12.0
2.0
0.08 msec ⫺1
0.0 mV

Parameters in nanosiemans per square micrometer denote maximal conductances of
corresponding currents in the GPe current balance equation. Parameters in milli-
volts represent reversal potentials for these currents. Parameters in milliseconds are
time constants relating to the time evolution of the gating variables in the Hodgkin–
Huxley representations of these currents, whereas other parameters are associated
constants.

voltage-clamp simulations. Figure 1b displays the membrane po-
tential of a model STN cell as a function of constant current
⫽ 0. The frequency–current (f–I)
injection, after setting gNa
relation for a model STN cell is shown in Figure 1c. Figure 1d
shows the duration of the afterhyperpolarization after a 500 msec
period of high-frequency spikes evoked by different levels of
current pulses. Note that the afterhyperpolarization increases
smoothly over a wide range of ﬁring rates during the pulses.

2966 J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

3

⫽ gT

⫽ 0; dashed line, gCa

Figure 1. Properties of STN model neuron. a, Current as a function of voltage. For ﬁxed voltages, steady-state currents were computed with slow gating
variables set to their limiting values [X
X⬁(v); see Materials and Methods]. In this and all subsequent ﬁgures, omitted units are as in Tables 1 and 2.
b, Membrane potential of a model STN cell under various current injections. The parameter gNa has been set to 0 to mimic the behavior of an STN cell
in the presence of sufﬁcient concentration of TTX to block spiking. c, Spike frequency as a function of injected current (solid line, full model; dotted line,
⫽ 0). d, Duration of afterhyperpolarization after high-frequency spiking. A constant current pulse was applied to a model
gAHP
STN cell for 500 msec. After this, a prolonged afterhyperpolarization occurred before the cell returned to regular spiking. Its duration is plotted against
the strength of applied current. e, f, STN rebound bursts after hyperpolarizing injections. e, Model responses of STN cell to currents of varying duration:
25 pA/␮m 2 of current applied for 300 (top), 450 (middle), and 600 (bottom) msec. Longer current application augments deinactivation of IT, enhancing
rebound. f, Responses to currents of varying magnitude: 20 (top), 30 (middle), and 40 (bottom) pA/␮m 2 of current applied for 300 msec. Stronger current
application augments deinactivation of IT, enhancing rebound.

Figure 1, e and f, demonstrates that STN neurons generate
rebound bursts after the removal of negative current. The dura-
tion of the rebound depends on the degree of hyperpolarization.
The rebound bursts typically last up to 200 msec and are then
followed by spontaneous ﬁring.

Sample responses of model GPe neurons to current injections
are shown in Figure 2. High-frequency repetitive ﬁring does not
show strong accommodation and is followed by a pronounced
hyperpolarization (Fig. 2). After a hyperpolarizing current pulse,
the neuron can exhibit rebound ﬁring. We note, however, that the
ability of GPe neurons to rebound is not essential for the gener-
ation of rhythmic population activity. For weak hyperpolarizing
applied currents, the neuron exhibits oscillations in which an
active spiking phase alternates with a silent phase of near resting
behavior. This activity pattern, which is common to fast-spiking
neurons in the GPe (Cooper and Stanford, 2000) and elsewhere,
has important implications for the model. In our implementation,
it arises because of the slow time course of calcium buildup and
decay in the neurons. At higher levels of current, the model cells
show continuous ﬁring in response to current pulses. Similar
dynamics can arise from other mechanisms (Rush and Rinzel,
1995), and the mechanism of this kind of ﬁring in GPe neurons is

not known with certainty. The network dynamics that arise from
this ﬁre-and-pause mode of activity in our model do not depend
critically on the cellular mechanism. We also note that several
papers have reported various types of neurons within the GPe.
Our model GPe neurons, as shown in Figure 2, were adjusted to
display properties similar to the type 2 neurons described
by Nambu and Llina˜s (1994), the type A neuron described by
Cooper and Stanford (2000), and the repetitive ﬁring neurons
described by Kita and Kitai (1991). Recent experiments have
suggested that this is the most dominant type of neuron within
GPe. The episodic ﬁring behavior seen at weakly negative ap-
plied currents resembles the high-frequency discharge with pause
described by DeLong (1971). In our simulations of the STN–GPe
network, Iapp is taken to be a small hyperpolarizing (negative)
current and, as described in Materials and Methods, will approx-
imate input from the striatum.

The prototype networks
In the following sections we shall describe the network activity
generated by three prototype network architectures, as well as
how this activity depends on the synaptic conductances gS3 G,
gG3 G, and the applied current Iapp to GPe. Each of the three

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976 2967

The activity patterns that this network displays are summa-
rized in Figure 3b–d. In these patterns, the ﬁring of each cell is
typically irregular and weakly correlated with the activity of other
cells. Dependence of activity on gS3 G and gG3 G is illustrated in
Figure 3b. As with all the architectures, if gS3 G is too small, then
the GPe cells cannot respond to STN ﬁring, and there is no
network activity, only the pacemaking of the STN cells. For
larger values of gS3 G, the occasional ﬁring of GPe cells produces
an irregular background of inhibition that deregularizes the STN
neurons, resulting in sparse irregular ﬁring in both structures
(Fig. 3c, ﬁrst panel). GPe neurons ﬁre in a correlated (but not
perfectly one-to-one) way with the single STN neuron to which
each is connected, but correlations are weak among randomly
selected cell pairs. The correlations that do occur have a very
narrow time scale, with connected GPe and STN cells ﬁring
almost simultaneously as the GPe neuron ﬁres on the EPSP
generated by the STN neuron or not at all. With still larger values
of gS3 G, the network displays episodic activity, as shown in
Figure 3, c and d. During each episode, the cells ﬁre irregularly,
and there is an increased synchronization both within and among
nuclei. The episodes of ﬁring involve all neurons in the network.
The episodes last for ⬃300 msec, and their durations increase
with increasing gS3 G; the silent periods between the episodes
remain approximately constant at 500 msec. When gS3 G becomes
sufﬁciently large, the network activity switches to continuous,
irregular spiking as depicted in Figure 3, c and d. There are weak
or no within-nuclei correlations of ﬁring in this continuous re-
gime, and across-nuclei correlations are rare because they are
restricted to cells receiving direct interconnections (which are
sparse). This is shown in Figure 3d, but was also tested by
calculating the cross-correlations among and between the two
groups of cells.

Episodic rhythms
To understand the neuronal mechanism underlying episodic
rhythms, suppose that one or more STN cells ﬁre action poten-
tials. The resulting excitation may induce the corresponding GPe
cells to respond with their own spikes. This leads to hyperpolar-
ization of STN cells, which resets the pacemakers of these. This
is the same mechanism illustrated experimentally by Bevan et al.
(2001) after stimulation of inhibitory inputs to the STN. The
postinhibitory ﬁring of the STN neurons induces another round
of ﬁring in the GPe neurons. So long as there is some divergence
in one or both directions (as in the GPe3STN connection of Fig.
3a), activity in some neurons will tend to recruit others, and the
entire network will ultimately be recruited. This causes T currents
within the STN cells to deinactivate so that activity during the ep-
isode can be sustained through postinhibitory rebound. The ter-
mination of an episode of activity is caused by activation of the
outward K ⫹ current, IAHP, in the GPe cells as calcium builds up
with each additional spike. This is illustrated in Figure 4. Once
IAHP is sufﬁciently activated, a GPe neuron is no longer able to
respond to excitation from STN. When GPe activity terminates,
STN cells may ﬁre one last burst of spikes caused by postinhibi-
tory rebound. Activity then recurs when STN cells recover
enough to ﬁre again, by which time the GPe cells can again
respond to the STN.

As described earlier, if the overall current input to a GPe cell
is weakly inhibitory, then the calcium of the cell can reach a level
that inhibits ﬁring (Fig. 2a); thus, the neuron ﬁres in the episodic
mode. In our simulations, we assume that the hyperpolarizing
applied current from striatum to GPe (Iapp) is strong enough such

Figure 2. Properties of GPe model neuron. a, Top three time traces show
ﬁring proﬁles of a model GPe cell under depolarizing, zero, and small
hyperpolarizing input currents (Iapp in pA/␮m 2), respectively. Bottom
trace shows afterhyperpolarization of a model GPe cell after injection of
a depolarizing current pulse. b, Membrane potential of a model GPe cell
⫽ 0. c, Frequency of GPe
as a function of injected current, with gNa
spiking as a function of injected current.

prototype architectures includes a distinct type of connectivity
between STN and GPe cells. In all of these, each cell only
contacts a small number of other cells. However, within the
simulated networks, the density of connections relative to the size
of the network varies across architectures, and they are named
accordingly: in sparsely connected architectures, each cell sends
out connections to a small subset of the STN and GPe popula-
tions; in tightly connected architectures, the connectivity patterns
yield localized circuits of reciprocally connected GPe and STN
cells, in which each cell sends inputs to, and receives inputs from,
a relatively large subset of the other cells in the circuit.
Random, sparsely connected architecture
The simplest class of networks consistent with low connectivity is
one in which each GPe cell sends inhibitory input to a small
proportion of the STN neurons selected randomly, and the STN
cells also make sparse and random connections. The chances of
reciprocal connections between any STN–GPe cell pair is low.
This class of networks was represented using the network shown
in Figure 3a. The subthalamic neurons could ﬁre spontaneously
by their usual pacemaker mechanism (Bevan and Wilson, 1999;
Beurrier et al., 2000) but the GPe neurons were inhibited by the
application of Iapp (representing striatal inhibition) to a level just
adequate to prevent their spontaneous ﬁring.

2968 J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

Figure 3. Activity patterns in a random, sparsely connected architecture. a, Arrangement of the model network. Each STN neuron excites a single GPe
neuron selected at random, and each GPe neuron inhibits three randomly chosen STN cells. GPe cells also inhibit each other through all-to-all
connections. b, Dependence of activity patterns on coupling strengths gG3 G and gS3 G. Weak STN3GPe excitation or strong GPe3GPe inhibition leads
to sparse irregular ﬁring patterns. Intermediate values yield episodic patterns, whereas high levels of excitation and low levels of GPe mutual inhibition
give rise to continuous uncorrelated activity. c, Membrane potential (in millivolts) as a function of time (milliseconds) for individual cells in each of the
⫽ ⫺1.2 pA/␮m 2), episodic, almost-synchronized
activity patterns: sparse activity (gG3 G
⫽ 0.02 nS/␮m 2;
spiking (gG3 G
⫽ ⫺1.2 pA/␮m 2). d, Network activity in various patterns. In each plot, 10 rows show the voltage traces
gS3 G
of 10 cells, with time evolving over 2000 msec to the right along each row. Voltage is coded in grayscale as shown. Because they are so brief, individual
action potentials (dark gray line segments) are not prominent, but are more clearly indicated by their afterhyperpolarization (white bars).

⫽ ⫺1.2 pA/␮m 2), and continuous, irregular spiking (gG3 G

⫽ 0.03 nS/␮m 2; gG3 S

⫽ 0.06 nS/␮m 2; gS3 G

⫽ 0 nS/␮m 2; gS3 G

⫽ 0.016 nS/␮m 2; gG3 S

⫽ 2.5 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

⫽ 0.1 nS/␮m 2; gG3 S

⫽ 2.5 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

⫽ 2.5 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976 2969

GPe inhibition in an STN neuron and the postinhibitory
response.

All of the above description holds regardless of the action of
the intra-GPe inhibition. Because it is all-to all, the intra-GPe
inhibition in this network acts in proportion to the total activity in
the GPe, and so opposes the STN3GPe excitation. For larger
values of gG3 G, the network requires increased STN activity to
support organized ﬁring. The value of gS3 G at which the activity
switches from episodic to continuous ﬁring increases, in an ap-
proximately linear manner with gG3 G. When gG3 G becomes too
large, the network exhibits asynchronous, irregular activity, as
occurs when gS3 G is small.

Structured, sparsely connected architecture
We next consider the off-center architecture depicted in Figure
5a. Although the GPe3STN connection is more structured in
this model network, it is so in a way that avoids direct reciprocal
connections between GPe and STN. The nearest-neighbor intra-
GPe inhibition is structured to create a lateral inhibition among
GPe neurons that have overlapping projections in the STN.

This network can give rise to more varied network dynamics
than the unstructured network described above. Most patterns
feature clustering, in which each structure is divided into subsets
of neurons that become highly correlated with each other (Fig.
5b–d). The most commonly observed clustered pattern consists of
two clusters, with alternating pairs of cells belonging to opposite
clusters (Fig. 5c,d). Different clusters alternate ﬁring, and in this
pattern, cluster membership is persistent over time. The switch of
activity from one cluster to another can involve either an overlap
of ﬁring or a brief interval of network quiescence, depending on
parameters. There is a tight synchrony of ﬁring among cells of the
same cluster.

Clustered rhythms
To understand the neuronal mechanism underlying clustered
rhythms, consider an example of an activity pattern consisting of
two clusters. Suppose that one subpopulation of STN neurons,
which we denote as S1, excites its corresponding subpopulation of
GPe neurons, call them G1, to initiate an episode of ﬁring. If the
inhibition from G1 is powerful enough, then it prevents the
remaining STN neurons, in a different subpopulation S2, from
ﬁring. Eventually, cells in S2 escape from their suppressed state
and ﬁre. This induces the remaining GPe cells, group G2, to ﬁre,
and the resulting inhibition terminates the activity of S1. The
roles of the S1/G1 and S2/G2 clusters are now reversed.

The primary reason why cells in S2 are able to escape is that
although S2 cells are hyperpolarized, their inward IT currents
deinactivate. A second reason is that there is some slight adap-
tation of ﬁring rates of cells in S1 as their IT currents inactivate
and their AHP currents accumulate. Unlike the episodic ﬁring
described earlier, cluster alternation is not primarily driven by
accumulation of AHP currents, but by persistent inhibition and
the resulting removal of inactivation of rebound currents. These
factors appear in Figure 6. As long as S1 cells maintain a high
ﬁring frequency, then so will cells in G1. This results in a tonic
level of inhibition to cells in S2, preventing them from ﬁring. A
decrease in the ﬁring rate of S1 caused by adaptation helps allow
S2 to become active, and its excitability is enhanced by rebound
currents accumulated during the persistent inhibition. The length
of time for which one cluster can ﬁre before another one takes
over, and hence the population bursting frequency, is mostly set
by the rate of deinactivation of IT in inactive STN cells relative to

Figure 4. Mechanisms underlying episodic activity patterns. The gray
trace in the top box shows the evolution of voltage over time for a single
GPe cell in an episodic pattern, whereas the black trace shows the voltage
for a single STN cell. The boxes below show the intracellular calcium
concentration of each cell as a function of time. Initially, GPe spikes
closely follow STN spikes. Here Iapp is sufﬁciently strong such that the
build-up of calcium terminates the GPe activity of the cell eventually,
after which the STN cell ﬁres one last volley of rebound spikes until about
2600 msec. Subsequent decay of calcium allows STN activity to resume
after time 3200 msec; this recruits the GPe cell again.

that GPe cells are not spontaneously active. When the excitatory
input from STN to GPe is relatively weak, the total input to GPe
is appropriate to trigger calcium-regulated episodic ﬁring. On the
other hand, if the excitation from STN to GPe is sufﬁciently
strong, the calcium-dependent AHP current in GPe cells will
achieve an equilibrium level that will slow but no longer terminate
GPe ﬁring. GPe cells will always be able to respond to the ﬁring
of STN cells in this case, and a continuous rhythm results.
Increasing gS3 G transforms an episodic rhythm into a continuous
one; such a transition may also be achieved by decreasing the
magnitude of Iapp from a large hyperpolarizing level.

The duration between active episodes is determined primarily
by the IAHP current in STN neurons. During an episode, STN
neurons ﬁre rapid action potentials resulting in an increase of
their intracellular calcium. Once the event terminates, there is a
prolonged afterhyperpolarization before the cells can resume
their pacemaking spiking activity (Bevan and Wilson, 1999) (Fig.
1d) and initiate a new episode. The time between episodes does
not depend signiﬁcantly on Iapp or the synaptic parameters gS3 G,
gG3 G.

The duration of each episode is determined by two factors. The
ﬁrst is how long it takes for calcium to build up and hyperpolarize
GPe neurons so that they no longer respond to excitation from
STN. This depends on the strength of STN3GPe synaptic exci-
tation, as well as on Iapp. The second factor is the duration of any
rebound bursting generated by STN neurons at the end of the
episode. Both of these depend on the rate of ﬁring within the ep-
isode. Firing rate within the episode is determined by the
strength of synaptic connections and the time between onset of

2970 J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

⫽ ⫺85 mV and ␤ ⫽ 0.04 msec ⫺1
Figure 5. Activity patterns in a structured, sparsely connected architecture. For all simulations in this Figure, vG3 G
for the GPe cells. a, Arrangement of the model network. Each GPe neuron inhibits its two immediate GPe neighbors; it also inhibits two STN neurons,
skipping the three located nearest to it. Each STN cell sends excitation only to the nearest, in register GPe cell. Spatially periodic boundary conditions
⫽ ⫺1.0 pA/␮m 2. The
were imposed. b, Dependence of activity patterns on coupling strengths gG3 G and gS3 G when gG3 S
parameter regime and initial conditions used favor formation of clusters rather than waves. Increases in gS3 G lead to continuous activity; increases in
gG3 G weaken activity. c, Voltage (in millivolts) as a function of time (in milliseconds) for individual cells in the three clustered activity patterns: weak
⫽ ⫺1.0 pA/␮m 2), episodic clustered oscillations
and irregular clustered activity (gG3 G
⫽ 0.72
(gG3 G
nS/␮m 2; gG3 S

⫽ ⫺1.0 pA/␮m 2). d, Network activity in various patterns, as in Figure 3d but with eight rows shown.

⫽ 4.5 nS/␮m 2 and Iapp

⫽ ⫺1.0 pA/␮m 2), and continuous clustering (gG3 G

⫽ 0.06 nS/␮m 2; gS3 G

⫽ 0.06 nS/␮m 2; gS3 G

⫽ 0.06 nS/␮m 2; gS3 G

⫽ 0.56 nS/␮m 2; gG3 S

⫽ 4.5 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

⫽ 4.5 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

⫽ 0.2 nS/␮m 2; gG3 S

⫽ 4.5 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976 2971

bution of phases among STN and GPe neurons, however, would
require traveling waves of activity within the STN and GPe.

As in the less structured architectures, intermediate values of
gS3 G give rise to episodic activity in the network as a whole (Fig.
5c,d). This occurs for the same reason (accumulation of Ca-
dependent K current), and because this is slower than the process
responsible for cluster alternation, it affects all clusters equally. At
higher values of excitation and/or lower levels of intra-GPe inhi-
bition, clustered activity becomes continuous, because the effect
of the AHP current is overcome (Fig. 5b–d). Episodic clustering
is less robust than continuous clustering, because in a sparsely
connected network, it is difﬁcult for calcium to build up sufﬁ-
ciently throughout the GPe population to turn off activity across
a large segment of the network. In fact, for sparsely connected
networks in general, episodic rhythms are more robust when the
architecture is random as opposed to structured (random connec-
tions allow activity to spread across the network more quickly).

Structured, tightly connected architecture
The third network to be considered is the structured, tightly
connected architecture represented by the model system in Figure
7a. Figure 7b illustrates regions in the (gS3 G, gG3 G) parameter
plane that support each activity pattern, whereas Figure 7, c and
d, shows how cellular activity varies over time in a variety of these
patterns. Again, Iapp is set at a level so that isolated GPe neurons
are silent.

Let us consider the network behavior at various different levels
of intra-GPe inhibition. First suppose that there is virtually no
⬇ 0). In this case, if gS3 G is very
intra-GPe inhibition (gG3 G
small, the STN neurons spike slowly via their pacemaker mech-
anism, the GPe neurons are mostly silent, and interaction be-
tween the GPe and STN populations is too weak to generate any
discernible network rhythm. Increasing gS3 G gives rise to an
episodic pattern, with every cell participating in events of repet-
itive spiking activity, separated by periods of quiescence, that
repeat periodically at 1–2 Hz. When gS3 G gets above a certain
level, the population activity switches to a continuous mode; all
the STN and GPe cells exhibit tonic spiking, with the spiking
frequency growing to ⬃25 Hz as gS3 G is increased. The trans-
formation from episodic to continuous activity achieved by in-
creasing gS3 G can also be observed after decreasing the magni-
tude of the hyperpolarizing Iapp. Recall that weakening Iapp
(making it less negative) transforms a GPe neuron from ﬁring in
the episodic mode to spiking continuously. The mechanism un-
derlying the transformation from episodic to continuous activity
in the network is similar to that in an isolated GPe neuron, and
in both of the architectures described earlier.

Higher levels of the intra-GPe inhibition have the effect of
producing traveling waves, within both the episodic and continu-
ous ﬁring modes (Fig. 7c,d). These waves correspond to solitary
pulses with no activity in the wake of the wave (note that the
appearance of multiple “bands” of activity in Figure 7d is caused
by the periodic boundary conditions imposed; at any one time,
only one localized group of cells is active). The propagation
structure of a wave was clearly discernible in cross-correllograms
calculated from the simulations (data not shown).

If gG3 G is increased to even higher values, the waves lose their
shape and ﬁring activity eventually becomes sparse, irregular, and
uncorrelated. For higher levels of excitatory drive from STN to
GPe, the intra-GPe synaptic conductance gG3 G needs to be
stronger before waves are able to form, but these waves exist for
a larger interval of gG3 G values (Fig. 7b).

Figure 6. Mechanisms underlying clustered activity patterns. The top box
shows the superimposed voltage time courses for an STN cell (dotted
trace) and a GPe cell (solid trace) from a single, tightly synchronized pair
belonging to the same cluster in a clustered rhythm; the middle box shows
the same for a single pair from a different cluster. The bottom box shows
the availability level of the IT currents for the STN cells in the two
different pairs (solid curve corresponds to middle box; dashed curve to top
box). When availability of IT becomes sufﬁciently large, the suppressed
cluster is able to escape and ﬁre; this then suppresses the previously active
cluster.

the level of inhibition they receive. For the parameters used here
(based on studies from brain slices) the cluster alternation rate
ranges from 4 to 6 Hz.

We note that other mechanisms besides deinactivation of the IT
current may also promote escape, thus contributing to the gener-
ation of clustered rhythms. For instance, it is possible that short-
term synaptic plasticity plays a role in escape mechanisms; in fact,
Hanson and Jaeger (2002) have recently demonstrated that the
STN to GPe pathway exhibits short-term depression.

A key point is that network activity segregates cells in such a
way that at any given time, neurons within silent STN clusters are
receiving more inhibition from active GPe cells than are the
active STN neurons. Hence, inhibition may play the dual role of
maintaining the active STN bursts (by deinactivating IT), while
suppressing the silent STN neurons.

Additional clustered patterns also arise from this architecture,
as do propagating waves. Many of these patterns are dynamic,
with cluster membership changing over time. Examples of alter-
native cluster patterns include a two-cluster pattern in which
every cell is in a different cluster from its two immediate neigh-
bors and a four-cluster pattern in which cells in the same cluster
are separated by three other cells.

Clustered activity leads to discrete phase differences among
neurons. The range and distribution of those differences is deter-
mined by the number of clusters, with the simplest outcome,
consisting of two phases, described here. In a larger network of
this kind, it is feasible that a large number of clusters could arise,
giving a wide range of phase relationships. A continuous distri-

2972 J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

Figure 7. Activity patterns in the structured, tightly connected architecture. a, Network used for these simulations. Each GPe neuron contacts the ﬁve
closest STN neurons, as well as all of the GPe cells. Each STN cell sends excitation to the three closest GPe cells. Spatially periodic boundary conditions
⫽ ⫺1.2 pA/␮m 2. Increases
were imposed. b, Dependence of activity patterns on coupling strengths gG3 G and gS3 G when gG3 S
in gS3 G lead to continuous activity; increases in gG3 G yield a transition to waves followed by sparse, irregular ﬁring. The value of gG3 G at which each
of these transitions occurs rises with gS3 G. c, Voltage (in millivolts) as a function of time (in milliseconds) for individual cells in various activity patterns:
⫽ ⫺1.2 pA/␮m 2 for GPe), episodic wave
episodic, almost-synchronized spiking (gG3 G
⫽ 0.03
(gG3 G
⫽ ⫺1.2 pA/␮m 2). d, Network activity in various patterns, featuring STN cells during episodic spiking, episodic wave,
nS/␮m 2; gG3 S
⫽ ⫺1.2 pA/␮m 2). The GPe cells
continuous wave, and sparse irregular spiking (gG3 G
exhibit voltage patterns very similar to the STN cells.

⫽ ⫺1.2 pA/␮m 2), and continuous wave (gG3 G

⫽ 0.013 nS/␮m 2; gG3 S

⫽ 1.0 nS/␮m 2 and Iapp

⫽ 0.0 nS/␮m 2; gS3 G

⫽ 0.013 nS/␮m 2; gG3 S

⫽ 1.0 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

⫽ 0.02 nS/␮m 2; gS3 G

⫽ 0.23 nS/␮m 2; gS3 G

⫽ 0.03 nS/␮m 2; gG3 S

⫽ 1.0 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

⫽ 1.0 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

⫽ 1.0 nS/␮m 2; Iapp

⫽ 0.1 nS/␮m 2; gS3 G

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976 2973

This network does not exhibit clustered patterns. Moreover,
the existence of waves here depends on a rather large GPe3GPe
synaptic footprint. If each GPe neuron sends inhibition only to its
immediate neighbors, then activity becomes distributed through-
out the populations rather than localized in the form of waves.

Propagating waves
To understand the neuronal mechanism underlying propagating
wave activity, we ﬁrst consider a simple network with each neu-
ronal population represented by a one-dimensional array, indexed
from left to right by i ⫽ . . . , ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . Each GPe cell
Gi sends inhibition to one STN cell Si, as well as every GPe cell,
and each STN cell Si sends off-centered excitation to the two GPe
cells Gi⫺1 and Gi⫹1. We assume that a wave has been generated
and is propagating to the right, and we suppose that at some time,
say t ⫽ 0, the GPe cell G0 starts to burst. We shall describe how
the activity continues to propagate to the right in a lurching
manner.

As G0 ﬁres, it inhibits the STN cell S0 and deinactivates the T
current in S0. When S0 escapes or becomes released from inhibi-
tion, it ﬁres a volley of spikes, in turn exciting the GPe cells G⫺1
and G1. At this point G1 is more excitable than G⫺1, because G⫺1
had recently ﬁred and is still in a partially refractory state. Hence,
G1 will tend to ﬁre in response to S0 before G⫺1 does. Once G1
ﬁres, it sends inhibition to all the other GPe cells. In particular, this
inhibition will prevent G⫺1 from ﬁring. Furthermore, when G1
ﬁres, it inhibits the STN cell S1; thus the entire process repeats,
except it is now shifted over by one STN and one GPe cell.

We have explored numerous related architectures and have
found that the existence of propagating waves is a very robust
activity pattern. Waves can exist if the STN3GPe connectivity
footprint is broader than the GPe3STN footprint, and also in
the reverse situation;
in addition, both on-centered and off-
centered footprints can support propagating waves. The mecha-
nism underlying wave activity in various different network archi-
tectures is essentially the same as described above. Typically, a
group of STN cells ﬁres synchronously because of postinhibitory
rebound, and this causes excitation to be sent to a corresponding
group of GPe cells. The GPe cells just ahead of the leading edge
of the wave will be the ﬁrst cells to ﬁre in response, because other
nearby GPe cells have just ﬁred and hence are in a refractory
mode. This ﬁring will inhibit the other GPe cells that had re-
ceived excitatory input, suppressing their activity; at the same
time, it will inhibit a group of STN cells. This group of STN
neurons will eventually ﬁre when they are able to escape, or
become released from, the inhibitory inﬂuence from GPe. The
process then continues as before.

We note that to generate a wave, it is important that the GPe
cells at the leading edge of the wave are able to inhibit those GPe
cells behind them. It is therefore necessary to have gG3 G sufﬁ-
ciently large. Decreasing gG3 G often transforms wave activity to
clustering or rapid spiking (either episodic or continuous). For
solitary waves to arise, the GPe3GPe footprint should also be
larger than the STN3GPe footprint; otherwise, activity spreads
quite rapidly throughout the network and full-population spiking
behavior or spatially periodic waves (data not shown) typically
result.
The speed with which the waves propagate is dependent on the
size of the STN3GPe and GPe3STN connectivity footprints.
Other synaptic parameters, such as gS3 G, also play a role in
determining wave speed. Moreover, the average active (and si-
lent) phase duration of STN neurons is directly correlated with

the length of time it takes the wave to travel from one end of the
array to the other, and hence inversely correlated with the speed.
We observed that at ﬁxed levels of gS3 G, stronger intra-GPe
inhibition produces slower waves; whereas at ﬁxed levels of gG3 G,
varying gS3 G has two competing inﬂuences on wave speed,
caused by different mechanisms coming into play for the release
or escape from inhibition of inactive STN cells.
Irregular and uncorrelated activity
These computational studies suggest
there are several
sources leading to irregular and uncorrelated activity patterns in
the STN–GPe network. An unstructured and sparsely connected
topography is one possible source; however, certain choices of the
synaptic parameters and applied currents also promote irregular
behavior regardless of network architecture. For example, we
observed that if gG3 G is sufﬁciently large and Iapp is above (i.e.,
less negative than) some ﬁxed hyperpolarizing level, then the
network activity is irregular. The implications will be discussed in
the next section. Here we describe both the topographic and the
input-related neuronal mechanisms underlying irregular uncor-
related behavior.

that

We saw earlier (Figs. 5, 7) that a structured architecture is
required for the generation of both clustered and propagating
wave solutions. In a clustered solution, the network organizes
itself so that each STN cell in an inactive cluster receives approx-
imately the same degree of inhibitory input. For a wave to be
propagated, the active STN and GPe cells must have structured
footprints to spread activity to cells ahead of the leading edge.
These patterns are not possible in a randomly connected network.
In such a topography, the ﬁring of a small number of cells tends
to spread activity (which may be either episodic or continuous)
efﬁciently throughout the network. Once one STN cell ﬁres, it
spreads inhibition to other STN cells via connections with the
GPe cells, thus delaying or possibly preventing activity of other
STN cells. Hence, one expects at most a loose synchronization
between the ﬁring of STN cells.

We next discuss why weakening striatal inhibition of the GPe
(represented here as the magnitude of Iapp) promotes irregular
behavior, especially if gG3 G is sufﬁciently large. Recall that
making Iapp less negative allows the GPe cells to ﬁre tonically
(Fig. 2a). This leads to tonic inhibitory input to the STN. If this
input is sufﬁciently strong, then it will completely suppress STN
activity. For moderate levels of tonic inhibition, the STN cells
may still be able to ﬁre action potentials caused by deinactivation
of IT; however, in the tonic ﬁring regime, the GPe neurons are less
sensitive to excitation from STN. This means that, for both
moderate and strong levels of striatal inhibition, excitation from
the STN is too weak to organize the GPe population into distinct
clusters or propagating waves. In this case, strong intra-GPe
inhibition may further desynchronize oscillations by delaying,
weakening, or suppressing the ﬁring of some GPe cells immedi-
ately after other GPe cells ﬁre. This type of network behavior is
consistent with that reported in related excitatory–inhibitory net-
works (Hansel and Mato, 2001).

DISCUSSION
The subthalamic nucleus and the globus pallidus are heavily
interconnected and should have a strong tendency to entrain each
other. Given that neurons in both areas have membrane proper-
ties that predispose them to rhythmic ﬁring,
it is somewhat
surprising that they are not engaged in rhythmic ﬁring all the
time. All available evidence, however, indicates that these struc-

2974 J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

important to determine the precision of the spatial organization
of GPe3STN and STN3GPe projections and whether the two
nuclei project on each other in a reciprocal or out of register
manner. In one anatomical study, dense, precisely reciprocal
connections between the subthalamic nucleus and the globus
pallidus was reported (Shink et al., 1996), but when individual
axons are stained, the connectivity pattern has appeared much
more diffuse (Sato et al., 2000). In the absence of deﬁnitive
anatomical information, our model can be of some beneﬁt by
comparing the expected activity patterns emerging from various
likely connectivity architectures and by characterizing conditions
under which the network may exhibit either synchronous or
asynchronous oscillations.

An emerging body of evidence suggests that even in the patho-
logical states caused by dopamine denervation, global synchro-
nous oscillatory activity is not common. A key ﬁnding of the
studies of synchronous oscillations in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-
tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-treated monkeys was the wide range
of phase relationships among neurons in the globus pallidus,
indicating that not all the cells oscillate synchronously (Raz et al.,
2000). This is in contrast with the synchronous episodes seen in
our random, sparsely connected network. We note that this ar-
chitecture lacks the structure required to support spatially orga-
nized activity, which could produce stable phase shifts among
neurons. The rest tremor in Parkinson’s disease also shows a
variety of phases in different parts of the body, suggesting that it
is not driven by a single oscillator (Hurtado et al., 2000; Ben-Paz
et al., 2001). In the reduced preparation described by Plenz and
Kitai (1999), some STN–GPe pairs of cells showed in-phase slow
oscillations, whereas others bursted out of phase. These results
suggest that different parts of the STN–GPe system may oscillate
separately from others. In this case, one possibility is that the
rhythm-generating mechanisms that we have elucidated in our
model network could be played out among multiple oscillatory
subnetworks. In the model network, the structured architectures
could produce spatial clustering and waves, which are consistent
with the range of phase relations of cellular activity seen in
experimental dopamine depletion studies. The network also pro-
duced the slow oscillations observed by Plenz and Kitai (1999) in
culture. Our results suggest that the absence of rhythmic activity
at tremor frequency in their preparation may occur because the
STN–GPe network in their experiment lacks the structured ar-
chitecture (Fig. 5a) needed for the generation of a clustered
rhythm. The dynamic clustering rhythms seen in our network are
also reminiscent of behavior reported in several experimental
studies. Hurtado et al. (1999) recorded neuronal activity from
awake Parkinson’s disease patients undergoing stereotaxic pal-
lidotomy. They found that some paired recording sites within GPi
showed periods of transient synchronization. Dynamic synchro-
nization of pallidal activity in MPTP-treated monkeys was also
reported by Bergman et al. (1998).

Roles of inhibition and the function of
the indirect pathway
According to recent studies, correlated oscillatory activity in the
GPe and STN neurons is closely related to the generation of the
symptoms of Parkinsonism. The origin of the oscillatory activity
or the correlations among the neurons is not obvious, because the
same neurons do not show strong correlations in untreated ani-
mals (Raz et al., 2000). The ﬁring rate model holds that during
Parkinsonian states, an increased level of inhibition from the
striatum to GPe causes a decrease in the activity of GPe. This in

Figure 8. Schematic diagram of the indirect pathway connections in the
basal ganglia in normal (left column) and parkinsonian (right column)
states. Minus symbols denote inhibitory connections; plus symbols denote
excitatory ones. In the parkinsonian regime, the combination of weakened
intra-GPe connections and strengthened striatal input set the stage for
synchronous GPe-STN oscillations and correlated rhythmic STN output.

tures do not generate correlated spontaneous rhythmic activity
(or even show internally correlated ﬁring) under physiological
conditions encountered in extracellular recording experiments
(Nini et al., 1995; Magill et al., 2000; Raz et al., 2000; Urbain et
al., 2000).

After experimental dopamine depletion, and in patients with
Parkinson’s disease, strongly correlated rhythmic activity can be
observed in both the subthalamic nucleus and in the globus
pallidus external segment (Bergman et al., 1994; Nini et al., 1995;
Magnin et al., 2000; Raz et al., 2000; Brown et al., 2001). The
subthalamic nucleus is required for the oscillations in the globus
pallidus, as STN lesions abolish pallidal burst ﬁring (Ni et al.,
2000); similarly, compromise of GPe interferes with parkinsonian
activity of STN (Chesselet and Delfs, 1996; Hassani et al., 1996).
Plenz and Kitai (1999) have shown that in organotypic cultures,
correlated activity can arise in both structures and is caused by
the interaction between the STN and GPe rather than being
driven by an external source. In that reduced preparation, pow-
erful excitation from the rebound burst ﬁring of STN neurons
produced increased activity in the GPe population, which then
inhibited the subthalamic cells and set them up for another
rebound.

We have shown in a biophysical, conductance-based model that
the cellular properties of STN and GPe cells can give rise to a
variety of rhythmic or irregular self-sustained ﬁring patterns,
depending on both the arrangement of connections among and
within the nuclei and the effective strengths of the connections.
The model was based on a simpliﬁed representation of the prop-
erties of STN and GPe neurons in slices and does not include all
the inﬂuences that may act in vivo. The dependence on network
architecture points out the importance of certain missing pieces
of anatomical information. It is critical to know the spatial extent
of the recurrent collateral connections among GPe neurons and
whether they are spatially organized or diffuse. Likewise, it is

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976 2975

turn would send less inhibition to STN, thus increasing STN
activity and ultimately leading to increased inhibitory output
from the basal ganglia to the thalamus (DeLong, 1990; Wichmann
and DeLong, 1996; Obeso et al., 1997). In our model network, a
more complex picture emerges, in which the STN and GPe are
spontaneously oscillatory and synchronous, whereas intra-GPe
inhibition and an appropriate level of input from the striatum can
act to suppress rhythmic behavior. Note that inhibition plays
multiple roles in the generation of each of the activity patterns we
observed. In the clustered rhythm, for example, active STN neu-
rons need moderate levels of feedback inhibition from the GPe to
synchronize among themselves. Silent STN neurons, on the other
hand, are prevented from ﬁring because they receive more pow-
erful tonic inhibition. For the generation of propagating waves,
intra-GPe inhibition is needed to prevent activity from persisting
in the wake of the wave. Hence, this inhibition helps to organize
the network into a structured activity pattern. If one increases the
intra-GPe inhibition, this can desynchronize the GPe oscillations,
and irregular ﬁring may result. The role of striatal inhibition is
the most pivotal
in generating or suppressing the organized
oscillatory activity, because it simultaneously controls the inhib-
itory feedback to the STN through the GPe cells and inﬂuences
the intra-GPe inhibition, which controls spatial patterning of
activity in the network.

Some papers have questioned the role of the so-called indirect
pathway (Parent and Hazrati, 1995; Levy et al., 1997; Parent and
Cicchetti, 1998). These arguments point to experiments demon-
strating that GPe activity does not decrease substantially in a
Parkinsonian state, as well as results indicating that the overall
level of GABAA received by GPe cells (from both striatal and
intrinsic sources) may hold steady or even decrease. The analysis
and simulations given in this paper suggest that to account for the
new experiments, one does not need to diminish the role of
the indirect pathway. Instead, our analysis demonstrates that the
diverse contributions of inhibition to indirect pathway ﬁring pat-
terns can shift the network between rhythmic and irregular
modes of ﬁring. In Figure 8, we suggest an alternative interpre-
tation of the roles of inhibition and excitation in allowing the
indirect pathway to generate tremor-like activity. In the normal
state, there is strong GABAA synaptic inhibition among GPe
neurons, making their output to the STN asynchronous, and
effectively weakening the synaptic interactions between GPe and
STN. After dopaminergic denervation, an increased level of in-
hibition from the striatum to GPe is combined with the release
of enkephalin and dynorphin, which acts presynaptically to
weaken the collateral connections among GPe cells (Stanford and
Cooper, 1999; Ogura and Kita, 2000). From our results, this could
strengthen and synchronize the interactions between STN and
GPe and shift the network into an oscillatory mode.

REFERENCES
Albin RL, Young AB, Penney JB (1989) The functional anatomy of

basal ganglia disorders. Trends Neurosci 12:366–375.

Baranauskas G, Thatch T, Surmeier DJ (1999) Delayed rectiﬁer currents
in rat globus pallidus neurons are attributable to Kv2.1 and Kv3.1/3.2
K(⫹) channels. J Neurosci 19:6394–6404.

Ben-Paz H, Bergman H, Goldberg JA, Giladi N, Hansel D, Reches A,
Simon ES (2001) Synchrony of rest tremor in multiple limbs in par-
kinson’s disease: evidence for multiple oscillators. J Neural Transm
108:287–296.

Bergman H, Wichmann T, Karmon B, DeLong MR (1994) The primate
subthalamic nucleus. II. Neuronal activity in the MPTP model of
parkinsonism. J Neurophysiol 72:507–520.

Bergman H, Raz A, Feingold A, Nini A, Nelken I, Hansel D, Ben-Paz H,
Reches A (1998) Physiology of MPTP tremor. Mov Disord 13:29–34.
Beurrier C, Bioulac B, Hammond C (2000) Slowly inactivating sodium

current (I(NaP)) underlies single-spike activity in rat subthalamic neu-
rons. J Neurophysiol 83:1951–1957.

Bevan MD, Wilson CJ (1999) Mechanisms underlying spontaneous os-
cillation and rhythmic ﬁring in rat subthalamic neurons. J Neurosci
19:7617–7628.

Bevan MD, Wilson CJ, Bolam JP, Magill PJ (2000) Equilibrium poten-
tial of GABAA current and implications for rebound burst ﬁring in rat
subthalamic neurons in vitro. J Neurophysiol 83:3169–3172.

Bevan MD, Magill PJ, Hallorth NE, Bolam JP, Wilson CJ (2001) Reg-
ulation of the timing and pattern of action potential generation in rat
subthalamic neurons in vitro by GABAA IPSPs. J Neurophysiol, in
press.

Brown P, Oliviero A, Mazzone P, Insola A, Tonali P, Di Lazzaro V
(2001) Dopamine dependency of oscillations between subthalamic nu-
cleus and pallidum in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci 21:1033–1038.

Chesselet MF, Delfs JM (1996) Basal ganglia and movement disorders:

an update. Trends Neurosci 18:417–422.

Cooper AJ, Stanford IM (2000) Physiological and morphological char-
acteristics of three types of rat globus pallidus neurone in vitro.
J Physiol (Lond) 527:291–3004.

DeLong MR (1971) Activity of pallidal neurons during movement.

J Neurophysiol 34:414–427.

DeLong MR (1990) Primate models of movement disorders of basal

ganglia origin. Trends Neurosci 13:281–285.

Hansel D, Mato G (2001) Existence and stability of persistent states in

large neuronal networks. Phys Rev Lett 86:4175–4178.

Hanson JE, Jaeger D (2002) Short-term plasticity shapes the response to
simulated normal and Parkinsonian input patterns in the globus palli-
dus. J Neurosci, in press.

Hassani OK, Mouroux M, Fe´ger J (1996) Increased subthalamic neuro-
nal activity after nigral dopamine lesion independent of disinhibition
via the globus pallidus. Neuroscience 72:105–115.

Hazrati LN, Parent A (1992) Convergence of subthalamic and striatal
efferents at pallidal level in primates: an anterograde double-labeling
study with biocytin and PHA-L. Brain Res 569:336–340.

Hernandez-Pineda R, Chow A, Amarillo Y, Moreno H, Saganich M, de
Miera EV, Hernandez-Cruz A, Rudy B (1999) Kv3.1-Kv3.2 channels
underlie a high-voltage-activating component of the delayed rectiﬁer
K⫹ current in projecting neurons from the globus pallidus. J Neuro-
physiol 82:1512–1528.

Hurtado JM, Gray CM, Tamas LB, Sigvardt KA (1999) Dynamics of
tremor-related oscillations in the human globus pallidus: a single case
study. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:1674–1679.

Hurtado JM, Lachaux JP, Beckley DJ, Gray CM, Sigvardt KA (2000)
Inter- and intralimb oscillator coupling in parkinsonian tremor. Mov
Disord 15:683–691.

Kita H, Kitai ST (1991) Intracellular study of rat globus pallidus neu-
rons: membrane properties and responses to neostriatal, subthalamic
and nigral stimulation. Brain Res 564:296–305.

Kitai ST, Kita H (1987) Anatomy and physiology of the subthalamic
nucleus: a driving force of the basal ganglia. In: The basal ganglia II:
structure and function; current concepts (Carpenter MB, Jayaraman A,
eds), pp. 357–373. New York: Plenum.

Levy R, Hazrati L-N, Herrero M-T, Vila M, Hassani O-K, Mouroux M,
Ruberg M, Asensi H, Agid Y, Feger J, Obeso JA, Parent A, Hirsch EC
(1997) Re-evaluation of the functional anatomy of the basal ganglia in
normal and parkinsonian states. Neuroscience 76:335–343.

Magill PJ, Bolam JP, Bevan MD (2000) Relationship of activity in the
subthalamic nucleus-globus pallidus network to cortical electroenceph-
alogram. J Neurosci 20:820–833.

Magnin M, Morel A, Jeanmonod D (2000) Single-unit analysis of the
pallidum, thalamus, and subthalamic nucleus in parkinsonian patients.
Neuroscience 96:549–564.

Nambu A, Llina˜s R (1994) Electrophysiology of globus pallidus neurons

in vitro. J Neurophysiol 72:1127–1139.

Ni Z, Bouali-Benazzouz R, Gao D, Benabid A, Benazzouz A (2000)
Changes in the ﬁring pattern of globus pallidus neurons after the
degeneration of nigrostriatal pathway are mediated by the subthalamic
nucleus in rat. Eur J Neurosci 12:4338–4344.

Nini A, Feingold A, Slovin H, Bergman H (1995) Neurons in the globus
pallidus do not show correlated activity in the normal monkey, but
phase-locked oscillations appear in the MPTP model of parkinsonism.
J Neurophysiol 74:1800–1805.

Obeso J, Rodriguez M, DeLong MR (1997) Basal ganglia pathophysiol-

ogy: a critical review. Adv Neurol 74:3–18.

Ogura M, Kita H (2000) Dynorphin exerts both postsynaptic and pre-
synaptic effects in the globus pallidus of the rat. J Neurophysiol
83:3366–3376.

Parent A, Cicchetti F (1998) The current model of basal ganglia orga-

nization under scrutiny. Mov Disord 13:199–202.

Parent A, Hazrati L-N (1995) Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia.
II. The place of subthalamic nucleus and external pallidum in basal
ganglia circuitry. Brain Res Rev 20:128–154.

Plenz D, Kitai S (1999) A basal ganglia pacemaker formed by the sub-

thalamic nucleus and external globus pallidus. Nature 400:677–682.

2976 J. Neurosci., April 1, 2002, 22(7):2963–2976

Terman et al. • Subthalamopallidal Activity Patterns

Raz A, Feingold A, Zelanskaya V, Vaadia E, Bergman H (1996) Neu-
ronal synchronization of tonically active neurons in the striatum of
normal and parkinsonian primates. J Neurophysiol 76:2083–288.

Raz A, Vaadia E, Bergman H (2000) Firing patterns and correlations of
spontaneous discharge of pallidal neurons in the normal and tremulous
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6 tetrahydropyridine vervet model of parkin-
sonism. J Neurosci 20:8559–8571.

Rush ME, Rinzel J (1995) The potassium A-current, low ﬁring rates and
rebound excitation in Hodgkin–Huxley models. Bull Math Biol
57:899–929.

Sato F, Parent M, Levesque M, Parent A (2000) Axonal branching
pattern of neurons of the subthalamic nucleus in primates. J Comp
Neurol 424:142–152.

Shink E, Bevan MD, Bolam JP, Smith Y (1996) The subthalamic nucleus
and the external pallidum: two tightly interconnected structures that
control the output of the basal ganglia in the monkey. Neuroscience
73:335–357.

Song WJ, Baba Y, Otsuka T, Murakami F (2000) Characterization of
Ca 2⫹ channels in rat subthalamic neurons. J Neurophysiol 84:2630–2637.
Stanford IM, Cooper AJ (1999) Presynaptic ␮and opioid receptor mod-
ulation of GABAA IPSCs in the rat globus pallidus in vitro. J Neurosci
19:4796–4803.

Stefani A, Spadoni F, Bernardi G (1998) Group I mGluRs modulate
implications. Synapse

calcium currents
30:424–432.
Surmeier DJ, Seno N, Kitai ST (1994) Acutely isolated neurons of the
rat globus pallidus exhibit four types of high-voltage activated Ca 2⫹
current. J Neurophysiol 71:1272–1280.

Urbain N, Gervasoni D, Souliere F, Lobo L, Rentero N, Windels F,
Astier B, Savasta M, Fort P, Renaud B, Luppi P, Chouvet G (2000)
Unrelated course of subthalamic nucleus and globus pallidus neuronal
activities across vigilance states in the rat. Eur J Neurosci 12:3361–3374.
Wichmann T, DeLong MR (1996) Functional and pathophysiological

in rat GP:

functional

models of the basal ganglia. Curr Opin Neurobiol 6:751–758.

