EMERGENCE OF ORGANIZED BURSTING IN CLUSTERS
OF PANCREATIC A-CELLS BY CHANNEL SHARING

ARTHUR SHERMAN,* JOHN RiNZEL,* AND JOEL KEIZER?
*National Institutes ofHealth, National Institute ofDiabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases-Mathematical Research Branch, Bethesda, Maryland 20892; and $Institute of Theoretical
Dynamics and Department ofChemistry, University of California-Davis, Davis, California 95616

Pancreatic 13-cells in an intact Islet of Langerhans exhibit bursting electrical behavior. The Chay-Keizer
ABSTRACT
model describes this using a calcium-activated potassium (K-Ca) channel, but cannot account for the irregular spiking
of isolated 13-cells. Atwater I., L. Rosario, and E. Rojas, Cell Calcium. 4:451-461, proposed that the K-Ca channels,
which are rarely open, are shared by several cells. This suggests that the chaotic behavior of isolated cells is stochastic.
We have revised the Chay-Keizer model to incorporate voltage clamp data of Rorsman and Trube and extended it to
include stochastic K-Ca channels. This model can describe the behavior of single cells, as well as that of clusters of cells
tightly coupled by gap junctions. As the size of the clusters is increased, the electrical activity shows a transition from
chaotic spiking to regular bursting. Although the model of coupling is over-simplified, the simulations lend support to
the hypothesis that bursting is the result of channel sharing.

I. INTRODUCTION

The Islets of Langerhans in the pancreas secrete insulin in
response to the level of glucose in the blood, thereby
maintaining the glucose level within a narrow operating
range. There are several million such islets, and each
contains several thousand insulin secreting cells, known as
13-cells, as well as other types of cells. The release of insulin
is pulsatile and is correllated with rhythmic oscillations in
membrane potential. If one impales a ,8-cell in an isolated
islet exposed to glucose with a microelectrode, one observes
a slow oscillation from a low voltage (silent phase) to a
plateau upon which is superimposed rapid spiking (active
phase). This phenomenon is commonly called bursting. See
Fig. 1 a.

Calcium flows into the cell during spiking (Dean and
Mathews, 1970; Rorsman and Trube, 1986), and this
increase in intracellular calcium is believed to cause insulin
release (Rubin, 1982). The fraction of time spent spiking
increases with extra-cellular glucose concentration (Bei-
gelman et al., 1977). In order to explain the electrical
aspects of this behavior Atwater et al. (1980) proposed a
mechanism based on voltage-gated potassium and calcium
channels and a calcium-activated potassium (K-Ca) chan-
nel. Chay and Keizer (1983) developed these ideas into a
quantitative, dynamic model, which accounted well for a
number of observations made in the islet preparation. In
the absence of voltage clamp data for the 13-cell, this model

Address correspondence to Dr. Arthur Sherman, National Institutes of
Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases-Mathematical Research Branch, Building 31, Room 4B-54,
Bethesda, MD 20892.

was based on modifications of Hodgkin-Huxley kinetics for
the squid giant axon.

Within an islet, 13-cells are known to be electrically
coupled and bursting is approximately synchronous. The
Chay-Keizer model describes the electrical behavior only
of a representative cell in an intact, perfectly synchronized,
islet. On the other hand, 13-cells burst only when coupled in
the islet (or artificially clumped together in vitro). Single
cells exhibit irregular spiking, as shown in Fig. 1 c, from
Rorsman and Trube (1986). We cannot conceive of any
modification of the Chay-Keizer model involving only
coupling and deterministic mechanisms that can account
for both the single-cell and cell cluster behavior. Thus, in
pursuing our long-term goal of understanding bursting and
synchronized activity in the 1-cell, we have been led to
consider stochastic mechanisms.

We focus on a stochastic explanation of the effects of
coupling called channel sharing, first advanced by Atwater
et al. (1983). These authors noted that the conductance of
a single K-Ca channel is large compared with the total K+
conductance of the 13-cell and that the K-Ca channels are
open very rarely under physiological voltages and intracel-
lular calcium concentrations (Findlay et al., 1985). They
inferred that the resting potential would be unstable unless
the cells shared channels by electrical coupling through
gap junctions. If very few of these channels are open at any
given time, then random channel events may perturb the
membrane potential of an isolated cell enough to disrupt
the burst pattern and produce the observed irregular
behavior of single cells. In clusters (islets or clumps) of
electrically-coupled 13-cells, on the other hand, regular
bursting might be possible because the contribution of each

BIOPHYS. J.©BiophysicalSociety
Volume 54

September 1988

411-425

*

0006-3495/88/09/411/15

$2.00

411

-40

-20

-50

-60L

15 s

30 a

4 a

(a) Recording from a representative #-cell in an intact islet in
FIGURE 1
11 mM glucose. Taken from Atwater and Rinzel, 1986. (b) Recording
from a 70-um diameter cluster of cultured ,-cells exposed to 10 mM
glucose. Reprinted with permission from Rorsman and Trube, 1986, Fig.
1 a. (c) Spontaneous spiking from an isolated ,-cell exposed to 10 mM
glucose. Reprinted with permission from Rorsman and Trube, 1986, Fig.
2 c.

channel to the current density in the shared membrane,
and hence the perturbing effect of each channel event,
would be smaller. By incorporating a stochastic K-Ca
channel into a revised version of the Chay-Keizer model we
demonstrate here the viability of the channel-sharing
hypothesis. Bangham et al. (1986) presented a single-cell
model that had stochastic K+ channels and exhibited
irregular spiking. They did not, however, model cell clus-
ters and so did not address the channel-sharing hypothesis
or consider the emergence of bursting in large clusters of
cells.

It is tempting to dismiss the importance of K-Ca chan-
nels for bursting because they are open so rarely. Thus, a
number of alternative molecular mechanisms for bursting,
all involving slow feedback of calcium onto inward or
outward currents, have been proposed and explored theo-
retically. For a review see (Keizer, 1988). Our simulations
suggest, however, not only that the K-Ca channels may
play a role in bursting, but that they must necessarily be
open a small fraction of the time for organized bursting to
occur. Our general conclusions about channel sharing in
cell clusters are independent of the precise mechanism of
calcium feedback. In fact, Chay and Kang (1988) have
obtained similar results using a model based on calcium
inactivation of a calcium channel and different simulation
techniques.

In order to base our investigation more solidly in experi-
mental facts, we have updated the Chay-Keizer model by
incorporating recent experiments of Rorsman and Trube
(1986) that characterize the voltage-gated potassium and
calcium currents in the (3-cell. The details of this are given
in Section II, where we formulate a deterministic model for
a representative (-cell in a synchronized islet. Section III
introduces a model for an isolated (3-cell with a finite
number of stochastic K-Ca channels. In Section IV this
treatment is extended to a cluster of tightly-coupled sto-

412

chastic (3-cells. We demonstrate that, as the number of
cells in the cluster is increased, there is a transition from
irregular spiking to bursting. We also draw some theoreti-
cal conclusions from our simulations about channel shar-
ing. We show how the results depend on the unitary
conductance and density of the shared channel. This is
important because these parameters are not precisely
known at the present time. In Section V we critique the
model and discuss its applicability to the A-cell. We
conclude with suggested issues for experimenters to investi-
gate in light of the model's predictions.'

II. DETERMINISTIC MODEL FOR A
REPRESENTATIVE CELL IN A
SYNCHRONIZED ISLET

Voltage-Dependent Currents and Action
Potential Generation

We base our model for the representative (-cell on whole-
cell voltage clamp experiments performed at 20-22 OC by
Rorsman and Trube (1986). After the usual Hodgkin-
Huxley formulation, individual ionic currents are repre-
sented as products of voltage and time-dependent conduc-
tances with driving potentials that reverse at the Nernst
equilibrium potential. Each conductance is expressed as
the product of the total cell conductance and the activation
level, or fraction of channels open. With modifications, as
described below, we use the measured values for parame-
ters and theoretical expressions for activation levels given
by Rorsman and Trube. The exact parameter values and
equations are given in the Appendix. The most salient
experimental facts are (a) There is a voltage-gated Ca2"
conductance whose steady-state activation curve is given
by the sigmoidal function

In() + exp [(Vm - V)/Sm]~

1

(2.1)

with V/m = 4.0 mV and Sm = 14.0 mV. (b) There is a
voltage-gated K+ conductance with sigmoidal activation
curve

n( 1 ± exp

1

I+ep[(V, - V)/SJ]

(2.2)

with V5 =-19.0 mV and Sn = 5.6 mV. (c) No data are
given to choose values for the exponents p and At, or for the
presence of a leakage current. (d) From whole-cell current
measurements and the above activation curves we estimate
that the maximal Ca2" and K+ conductances, -Ca and

'Preliminary reports on this work have appeared in an abstract (Sherman,
A., J. Rinzel, and J. Keizer, 1988. Biophys. J. Vol. 53:518a [Abstr.]) and
a conference proceedings (Rinzel, J. 1988. On the electrical activity and
glucose response of insulin-secreting cells. In Biomathematics and
Related Computational Problems. L. Ricciardi, editor. 685-696. D.
Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Holland.)

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 54

1988

20-30 ms.

are on the order of several thousand pS, with -K about
twice as big as gCa (e) In the range of voltages of interest
for bursting, the time constants for the Ca2" and K+
currents, respectively Tm(V) and r,(V), are Tm
0.15-1.5
ms and rn

Because the time constant for the Ca2" current is so
small, we chose to set m(t) = mJ,(V); in this case the value
of p does not matter, so we let p = 1. For ,u we used the
value 1 (although variations of the model with ,u = 2 and a
correspondingly modified n. also gave reasonable results).
We found that by adjusting VI' slightly, to - 15 mV, the
model became much more robust under perturbations and
changes in other parameters. A formula for r,(V) was
obtained by fitting a function of the form

n5(V)

exp [(V- V)/a] + exp(-(V- V)/b) (23)

to the given experimental values. The leakage current was
found to be inessential.

We found that the standard current-voltage (I-V) rela-
tion, based on Ohm's law and the Nernst equation, is
inadequate to describe all of Rorsman and Trube's (Rors-
man and Trube, 1986) data for the Ca2` current. We
obtained an improved fit to the experimental I-V curve by
multiplying the current by a reverse sigmoidal factor,

1 + exp [(V- Vh)/Sh]'

(2.4)

with Vh = -10 mV and Sh = 10 mV. The product of
h(V)(V - Vca) with the single-channel conductance can
be interpreted as a nonlinear I-V relation for a single open
calcium channel. Although we can offer no channel model
which results in this I-V relation, it does give a reasonable
fit to the experimental I-V curves (Fig. 2) in Rorsman and
Trube. The shape is much closer to the experimental curves
than that of a linear I-V relation, and the scale is within a
factor of l/3. In particular, for the case [Ca]o = 2.56 mM, it
reproduces the early peak and sharp dropoff in the calcium
current. This representation does not, however, adequately

v (mV)

\--25

I (pA/pF)

\\

,-5.0

_,

--7.5

--10.0

--lL6

(Solid curve) Ic.(V) - gcm..(V)h(V)(V - 110). (Dashed
FIGURE 2
curve) Ic,(V) - gcm..(V)(V - 50 ). Including factor h(V) gives much
better agreement with the shape of the experimental calcium I-V curve
(See Rorsman and Trube, 1986, Fig. 3 a).

SHERMAN ET AL.

Emergence ofBursting by Channel Sharing

model the shift in the I-V curve as [Ca]l
is varied. Other
investigators have used the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equa-
tion (Hodgkin and Katz, 1949; Goldman, 1943) to model
calcium channels in other preparations. See, for example,
Kay and Wong (1986) on the guinea-pig hippocampal
neuron and Morris and Lecar (1981) for the case of
barnacle muscle fibers. We fotnd that this approach did
not adequately capture the early peak in Ic, nor were we
able to generate solutions with correctly shaped bursts
using that formulation.

The equations which describe the action-potential

dynamics of our model are given by:

dv

Cm dtI=-K - ICa - IK-C = -gKn(V- VK)

-gc m,.(V)h(V)(V- VC.) - gK-Ca(V- VK)

dn

==

<n.XV)- n]

(2.5)

(2.6)

where Cm is the total membrane capacitance of the cell; VK
and Vc, are the K+ and Ca2" reversal potentials, respec-
tively; and X is a nondimensional parameter, analogous to
the temperature in the Hodgkin-Huxley model, which we
have used to fine tune the K+ time constant. Here we have
included the calcium-activated potassium current, IK-C.,
but, for now, we treat the conductance gK&C as a parame-
ter. If X is near 1, the system exhibits action-potential
oscillations over a large, but bounded interval of gK-C
values.

Our calculations confirm the suggestion of Rorsman and
Trube (Rorsman and Trube, 1986, p. 532) that the volt-
age-gated calcium and potassium currents described above
are sufficient to generate the action potentials of the (3-cell.
Chay (1987) also obtains action potentials with a two-
current model of the ,B-cell that is based in part on the
Rorsman and Trube data. In order to obtain bursting she
employs calcium inactivation of the calcium conductance
as a feedback mechanism, rather than a calcium-activated
potassium conductance. While the activation parameters
and time constants for our voltage-gated potassium and
calcium currents are more faithful to those given by
Rorsman and Trube, we have not incorporated all of their
observations. In particular, we have neglected the slow
voltage-dependent inactivation of IK. With only minor
adjustment of other parameters this inactivation can be
incorporated in our model, but it does not change the
results qualitatively, so we have not included it in the
calculations below.

Bursting by Calcium Feedback

In order to formulate a bursting mechanism and analyze it,
we follow the ideas of Rinzel (1985) on the qualitative
structure of the Chay-Keizer model. This treatment
exploits the time-scale differences in the fast and slow
processes, (i.e., spike generation and calcium feedback to

413

the K-Ca current, respectively) to show how the cell
alternates between the active and silent phases. Since gK-C
varies slowly during a burst period, it is helpful to examine
how solutions of Eqs. 2.5 and 2.6 depend on gK-Ca when it is
treated as a parameter. First, we define the steady-state
current as:

ISS(V; gK-Ca) = gK"n(V)(V - VK)

+ jc3m.,>(V)h(V)(V - Vca) + gKC0(V- VK).

(2.7)
The voltages corresponding to zero crossings of this current
represent steady states of the membrane, i.e., time-
independent solutions of Eqs. 2.5-2.6. Note that the
expression for ISS incorporates the steady-state dependence
of n upon V. Fig. 3 a is a plot of ISS for several values of
gK.Ca. For gKCa large, the single steady-state V is near VK;
for gKJCa small, V lies intermediate between VK and Vc.
There is an intermediate range of gK.Ca values for which ISS
generates three steady states. A concise graphical sum-
mary (called a Z-curve) of the steady-state voltages as
functions of gK ca is shown in Fig. 3 b.

The mathematical stability and, hence, physical realiza-
bility of each steady state depends on the values of the
parameters in Eqs. 2.5-2.6 (For background on stability
analysis see Fitzhugh, 1961). Figs. 3 b and 4 a illustrate
the stability of these steady states with gK-Ca as a parameter
for different values of X. The equations are called bistable
because a low-V stable steady state coexists with a high-V
stable steady state or oscillatory state. The intermediate
steady state is unstable (dashed), and it represents a
threshold voltage of saddle type.

If X is large enough the delayed-rectifier current

a

g-Ka - 330

0----- -------

.

(a) Steady-state I- V relation for the deterministic model for
FIGURE 3
various values of gK C,, Eq. 2.7. (b) Z-curve obtained by plotting the zero
crossings of Iss(V; gK.C.) as a function of gKX. Solid portions of curve
represent steady states which are stable solutions to Eq. 2.5-2.6, while
dashed portions are unstable. Here A - 7. Stability was computed using
the program AUTO (Doedel, 1981). The small circles are the roots of ISS
200 pS and correspond to the small circles in Fig.
(V; gK) for gKc
3 a.

2-SC. - 160

-469

b

u-SC. - 130

-47.6

0.0

0.1

01
O.'S
Time (s)

0.4

0.5

FIGURE 4
(a) Bifurcation diagram computed using program AUTO
(Doedel, 1981). The Z-curve represents steady states of Eqs. 2.5-2.6.
Solid indicates stable, dashed unstable. Here, for X - 1.6, the high-V
steady state is unstable for a range of gKrC values and may be surrounded
by an oscillation; the fork on the Z-curve indicates the maximum and
minimum voltage of this periodic, repetitive firing, solution as functions of
gK. The left knee of the Z-curve at gKC,v ( - 160.30 pS) is where the
low voltage steady-state branch joins the threshold saddle branch. The
stable periodic solution branch terminates at gKdc,Ac (- 183.26 pS) where
the oscillating voltage collides with the saddle branch. As gKc. approaches
gK-C.,HC the period becomes infinite; the collision point is called a
homoclinic point. (b) Solution of Eqs. 2.5-2.6 with gKc. - 160 pS (upper)
and 180 pS (lower), corresponding roughly to the spikes seen at the
beginning and the end of a burst (see Fig. 5 a). Note that the amplitudes
change slightly and period almost doubles from the upper panel to the
lower.

responds so rapidly to changes in V that the inward and
outward currents balance, and there are no oscillations.
Thus, for X = 7 (Fig. 3 b) both the high-Vand low- Vstates
are stable (solid).

For X near 1.6 (Fig. 4 a), however, the high-Vstate may
no longer be stable but instead may be surrounded by a
periodic oscillation. Such fast time scale oscillations corre-
spond to the repetitive spiking of the active phase. Thus,
reading from left to right, at a certain value of
c (where
the fork begins) the upper steady state loses stability and
gives rise to a small amplitude oscillation. This event is
called a Hopf bifurcation. The upper and lower branches of
the fork represent the minimum and maximum voltages
attained by the oscillation for the corresponding value of
gK.Ca,; examples for two selected values of 9K4 are shown in
Fig. 4 b. The time courses were computed by integrating
Eqs. 2.5-2.6 with gKn as a parameter using a Gear
algorithm (Gear, 1967). The stability characteristics were
computed by the program AUTO (Doedel, 1981). The
computations were carried out on a VAX 8600 computer
(Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, MA).

The periodic solutions terminate when the oscillation's
minimum voltage just falls below the threshold, i.e., when

414

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 54

1988

the fork's lower branch contacts the intermediate steady
state. As gK-Ca approaches a critical value the period of the
oscillatory response tends to infinity; the limiting solution,
as it disappears, is called a homoclinic orbit, and we denote
the critical value gK-Ca,HC. The left knee of the Z-curve at
gK C,,, marks the transition from the saddle branch to the
low- V steady state.

Bistability is the underlying mechanism for bursting in
all existing models of the ,8-cell. In our model, slow upward
and downward variation of gK- through the range (gK-C",
gK-Ca,HC) sweeps the system alternately through active and
silent phases. It is necessary that the variations of gKCa be
very slow relative to the changes in V and n so that Eqs.
2.5-2.6 are in a quasi-steady state.

The two voltage-gated currents, IK and ICa, are delicately
balanced, and a small additional current, e.g., IKCa, on the
order of several pA, can switch the equations between the
two regimes. We will see later that the behavior of the
stochastic version of the model depends critically on the
size of the conductance window Ag (= gK-Ca,HC - gK-Ca,,)
which is traversed during an active or silent phase. The size
of the window depends sensitively on X and other parame-
ters.

We have considerable freedom in specifying the charac-
teristics of the slowly varying potassium conductance,
gK-C,, such that it can regulate the bursting. For simplicity,
we use the formulation originated by Plant (1978) and
adopted by Chay and Keizer (1983). Their idea can be
interpreted in terms of a K+ channel with two possible
states, open (0) and closed (C). When a Ca2, ion binds to
a closed channel it opens according to the kinetic equa-
tions:

kC
C + Ca =

.

(2.8)

At equilibrium the relative populations of open and closed
states satisfy

[0]
[C]

Ca,
Kd

(2.8a)

where Kd = k_/k+ and Cai is the concentration of free
intracellular calcium. Therefore, if the kinetics of the
binding process are rapid, we deduce from Eq. 2.8a that
the fraction of open channels is Cai/(Kd + Ca;) so that

sites. Thus, Cai satisfies the equation (Chay and Keizer,
1983)

dCa, =f(-aIC - kc Ca1),
dta Ca)

(2.10)

where a is a unit conversion factor to change current into
concentration/time and kc, is the net Ca2" removal rate.
Note that although the fraction of open channels equili-
brates instantaneously to the level of intracellular calcium,
it varies slowly because it depends only on calcium. Note,
also, that the model places no restriction on the value of
gK-Ca; for appropriate values off and kc, the value of Ca,
automatically adjusts to put gK-Ca in the range for bursting,
150-200 pS (cf, Fig. 4 a).

Eqs. 2.5, 2.6, 2.9, and 2.10 constitute the deterministic
bursting model. (A full statement of the equations and the
parameters is contained in the Appendix.) It would appear
to be one of the simplest models consistent with the

s. 1u.

Id 19^
w -.
qo

7

g-KCa (pS)

gK.ca(Caj) = -K-C Kd + Ca.

(2.9)

The value of Cai changes as a result of the inward Ca2`
current and because of calcium removal through mitochon-
drial uptake, pumping, or other unspecified mechanisms.
Intracellular calcium (Ca1) varies slowly because the frac-
tion of free calcium in the cell, f, is taken to be very small
(10-s - 10-s); this follows from the fact that the bulk of
incoming Ca2" is rapidly taken up by high affinity binding

FIGURE 5
Bursting solution for the deterministic model: Voltage, (a)
calcium-activated potassium conductance, (b) and intracellular calcium
(c) plotted against time. Solutions were obtained by integrating numeri-
cally Eqs. 2.5, 2.6, 2.9, and 2.10 using parameter values in the Appendix.
The period of the spikes increases from the beginning to the end ofa burst.
Note that gK c. is essentially a constant multiple of Cai because Kd is large.
See Eq. 2.9. (d) Bursting solution projected as V-gK-c. trajectory and
overlayed on expanded bifurcation diagram from Fig. 4 a. The arrows
indicate the direction of increasing time. If V-Ca; phase plane had been
drawn instead, the results would have been indistinguishable except for a
scale factor.

SHERMAN ET AL.

Emergence ofBursting by Channel Sharing

415

Rorsman and Trube data that exhibits bursting. More
elaborate internal calcium handling could be substituted
for Eq. 2.10 without interfering with the rest of the model.
We have ignored the known voltage dependence of the
K-Ca channel (Findlay et al., 1985) because present data
are not sufficiently accurate in the physiological range of
low V and low calcium. As more accurate data become
available, channel dynamics with voltage dependence and
more complicated calcium dependence could be employed.
Other slow potassium channels such as the voltage-
independent, ATP-inhibited potassium channel can be
added or substituted. Indeed, a model for bursting has been
developed which uses the Rorsman and Trube kinetics for
K+ and Ca2" conductances and which incorporates a
slowly varying ATP/ADP ratio to modulate the burst
(Magnus, 1988).

Figs. 5a-c show the voltage, calcium-activated potas-
sium conductance, and calcium time courses obtained by
numerical integration of Eqs. 2.5, 2.6, 2.9, and 2.10, while
Fig. 5 d shows the V-gKQ phase plane trajectory superim-
posed on an expanded view of the bifurcation diagram, Fig.
4 a. These pictures expose the Ca; feedback mechanism
which regulates the burst. During the silent phase Ca;
decreases due to calcium removal (the kca term), which
turns off the K-Ca channels and slowly depolarizes the cell.
When the membrane potential rises above a threshold the
voltage dependent K+ and Ca2" channels open and cause
repetitive spiking. The Ca2" channels allow influx of
calcium (the ICa term) into the cell which slowly reactivates
the K-Ca channels again, terminating the burst and repo-
larizing the cell.

Note that gK-c. slavishly follows Cai; this relationship
will be broken in the stochastic model. If we had drawn
Figs. 3 b, 4 a, and 5 d in terms of calcium instead of
conductance the results would have been indistinguishable
except for scale because the calcium dissociation constant
Kd is large, and hence gKcQ is approximately a constant
multiple of Cai.

same as the Chay-Keizer model, as updated in (Chay and
Keizer, 1985); the differences are quantitative. As with
their original model, one can simulate the glucose dose
response behavior by varying the rate (kc) of calcium
removal from the cytoplasm. The effects of quinine and
tetraethylammonium ion (TEA) can be modeled in the
same manner as in the old model (Chay and Keizer, 1983).
The spike height, rest potential, and the plateau potential
can be adjusted by manipulating A and VK. The burst
frequency depends almost linearly on f, provided f is
sufficiently small. The spike frequency with X = 1.65
decreases from -8 to 4 per s from the beginning to near the
end of a burst (comparable to experimental results), with a
precipitous drop to near zero frequency just as the burst
ends (compare with Fig. 4 b). The peak Ca2" and K+
currents are -20 and 12 pA, respectively, during the
active phase, about twice the Chay-Keizer values. The net
current varies between ±5-10 pA during the active phase.
The only area of major discrepancy between the two
models is the predicted range of values of gK-Ca. The new
model gives a range of 150-200 pS, which is ten times
greater than in the Chay-Keizer model and about two or
three times the value estimated from rubidium flux experi-
ments (Atwater et al., 1983).

This completes our discussion of the revised determinis-
tic model. It provides an adequate quantitative description
of the behavior of a typical 13-cell in a synchronized islet. As
indicated at the beginning, however, it does not predict the
irregular behavior of isolated cells. In order to achieve this
we turn to a stochastic description.

III. STOCHASTIC MODEL FOR AN
ISOLATED p3-CELL

Patch clamp experiments on the K-Ca channel show that it
has a large unitary conductance of =60-75 pS (average 71
pS) in unsymmetrical K+ solutions with outward current
(Atwater et al., 1988). Most previous experiments have
been performed in symmetrical high K+ solutions, and
various values ranging from -100 to 300 pS have been
reported for the unitary conductance (Barrett et al., 1982,
Cook et al., 1984; Findlay et al., 1985; Atwater et al.,
1988). The mean fraction open is very small (0-5%) at
membrane potentials <+25 mV (Findlay, 1985). Some
workers have therefore questioned the role of the K-Ca
channel in bursting. Yet, according to the model (cf., Figs.
3 and 4 a), if the average total K-Ca conductance were
much greater than 150-200 pS, the cell would be perma-
nently hyperpolarized. Therefore only two to four K-Ca
channels per cell can be open at any given time. Based on
patch clamp experiments in which at least one K-Ca
channel is found per 1 m2 patch (Andres Stutzin, personal
communication), we estimate that there are several
hundred K-Ca channels per cell. Thus, a small open
fraction is actually a necessary condition for bursting in
our model. The same observation also makes clear that a

The results depend sensitively on the value of X, which
controls the excitability of the spike generating system and
hence the shape of the fork in Figs. 4 a and 5 d. The
computations displayed in Fig. 5 were carried out with X =
1.6. Reasonable looking bursts can be obtained for X in the
range (1.5-1.7). As A is increased the fork closes up on the
upper branch so that part of the upper branch of the
Z-curve is stable. For A bigger still the entire upper branch
of the Z-curve becomes stable, and bursting is replaced by
a slow wave oscillation in which V alternates between the
upper and lower steady state branches. This corresponds to
the situation in Fig. 3 b. On the other hand, if A is too small
the fork opens out below the left knee and gK.C,,HC moves
leftward to equal gK-C,,* In this case bistability is lost, and
instead of bursting we find a large amplitude continuous
spiking mode called beating.
The structure of the K

- V phase plane and the
overall behavior of our revised model is qualitatively the

416

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 54

1988

single channel event can switch the cell between the spiking
and silent regimes. We explore whether stochastic fluctua-
tions of the K-Ca channel could produce the kind of
irregular records observed in individual cells.

Of course, the other channels will also be undergoing
stochastic fluctuations, but the K-Ca channel will have the
most significant effect because it has the largest unitary
conductance. A calculation of the standard deviations of
the three currents shows that if the conductance of the
K-Ca channel is, say, lOx > that of the delayed-rectifier
and 20x > that of the calcium channel, then the fluctua-
tions of the K-Ca current will dominate. Further support is
found in the Chay-Kang (1988) model for cell clusters in
which there is no K-Ca channel, and the largest channel is
the delayed-rectifier. Fig. 3 in that study shows that the
largest channel is responsible for the major part of the
stochastic effects, and that the two smaller channels may
safely be neglected.

We interpret the first order kinetic process represented
by Eq. 2.3 as a Markov process in which the channel jumps
from the open state to the closed state with probability per
unit time 1/Ir and jumps back with probability per unit
time 1/re:

C-0

1/TO

(3.1)

where ro and TC are then the mean open and closed times,
respectively. Let No = the number of open channels and let
Nc = the number of closed channels. The ratio of open to
closed channels depends on To and rT, and at equilibrium
the ratio of their mean values is:

(No)
(Nc)

To .
rc

(3.2)

In the deterministic model the fraction of open channels
depends monotonically on intracellular calcium. This
effect is achieved in the stochastic model by noting that ro
depends on Cai (Cook et al., 1984; Findlay, 1985) and
setting

TO
TC

Cai
Kd

(3.3)

We generally keep rC fixed and let ro be proportional to
Cat. If we let p = No/(No + NJ) denote the fraction of open
channels, then p is a random variable whose mean is the
fraction of total K-Ca conductance in the deterministic
case. For example, at equilibrium its mean value is

()= (NO)

(No0) + (Nc)

Ca,

Kd + Cai

34

(

Thus intracellular calcium provides a negative feedback
mechanism, as in the deterministic case, but now it does so
only indirectly by controling transition probabilities.

SHERMAN ET AL.

Emergence ofBursting by Channel Sharing

The associated system of stochastic equations is:

Cm

dV
dti

_

IK -ICa

gK-CaP(V- VK)

dn
di =(

An["(V) - n]
- na

dCa, =f(-daI - kca Cat),
dt

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

where p is determined by the stochastic process described
above. The three variable system of differential equations
and stochastic process can be solved numerically as follows:
given the values of V, n, Ca;, and p at time t, use a
numerical integrator to compute the values of V, n, and Cai
at time t + At. Then use Ca; to compute the probabilities of
channel opening and closing and the fraction of channels
open at t + At. We keep rT fixed and compute TO using the
formula TO = Tc * Cai/Kd.
The probability that a given open channel will close
to At/ro, provided At is
during the interval (t, t + At) is
chosen sufficiently small. Since the channels are indepen-
dent, the probability that one channel out of the population
of open channels closes is Pr{NS - Nc + 1, No
No- 11
= No At/ro.

repeat the cycle.

We choose At so that this probability is <0.1, which
assures that the probability of two openings is negligible.
To decide if a channel closing occurs in our simulations, we
use a random number generator to obtain a random
variable, X, chosen from a uniform distribution on the
interval [0, 1]. If X < No * At/Tr, we increment Nc and
decrement No by 1; otherwise we do nothing. We then
proceed in the same manner to determine whether one of
the closed channels opens during the interval (t, t + At).
The probability of this is Pr{NO- No + 1, Nc
Nc - 1
= Nc At/TrC
Finally we compute p at t + At, p = No/(No + NJ), and
For the benefit of readers who wish to perform these
computations we make some additional comments on
implementation. It is not necessary to monitor the state of
each channel, but only the total number of channels in each
state; this saves many calls to the random number genera-
tor. For a discussion of the validity of this simplification see
(Keizer, 1987). When looked at in this way, the process is
equivalent to a birth and death process (Cox and Miller,
1965). The time step must be chosen small enough to keep
the error in the integration of the deterministic variables,
V, n, and Cai small and also to keep the transition
probabilities small, say <0.1 as suggested above. Our
numerical integrator automatically chooses At so as to
satisfy the first criterion; we use the option to specify a
maximum allowable value for At to satisfy the second.
Using the channel parameters discussed below, typical
time steps were -0.2 ms. Since bursts last many seconds
1 a), hundreds of thousands of time steps are
(Fig.

417

required to do a complete simulation. Unlike the determin-
istic problem, which can easily be solved on a small
personal computer with a numeric co-processor, the sto-
chastic simulations require a fast mini-computer, such as a
VAX 8600. The total CPU time is proportional to the
number of time steps, hence the number of channels. In the
next section we will discuss clusters of cells sharing thou-
sands of channels, and for these simulations we found it
convenient to use a CRAY X-MP super-computer (Cray
Research, Inc., Mendota Heights, MN).

For the longest simulations presented below we used an
alternative method to track the channel events that takes
advantage of the fact that the time to the next event is
exponentially distributed with rate parameter N0/Tr +
Nc/rc. If the numbers of open and closed channels are at
their equilibrium values, one can show that the average
time between events is then

To + Tc

2(No + Nj)

(3.8)

with opening and closing probabilities

PriNc

Nc + 1, N, --N -1I=~ NclrC

N0/r0 + Nc /-rc

(3.9)

and
Pr{N0 - N.+ l,Nc -- Nc- 1II.OT

NO/TO + Nc /Tc

(3.10)

(For a proof of the equivalence of this approach with the
previous one see Cox and Miller, 1965). This time step is
bigger than the one required by the previous method by a
factor of - 5. We used this method in cases where the
number of channels was very large, and the average time
step was consequently very small. In this case a simpler
Runge-Kutta integration scheme was found to be adequate
for the deterministic variables. With this method, a simula-
tion with 100,000 channels and an average time step of
-0.005 ms, can be carried out in <5 min of CRAY time.
Like the previous method, the computation time is propor-
tional to the number of channels and inversely proportional
to the open and closed times, To and T,.
In order to carry out a simulation we must choose values
for the number of channels, N,.,, and for either ro or rc.
Based on a density of -1 K-Ca channel per 1 jAm2 patch we
let NtO = 600. For an assumed single-channel conductance
g of 50 pS the total cell conductance gK-Ca is 30,000 pS.
From the Z-curve and the value of
we can predict that
p will be -0.005. We choose Tc to be 1,000 ms and
constant. From Eq. 3.3, To will then vary with Ca; and be
-5 ms. We have no data on ro for the K-Ca channel in the
,B-cell, but 5 ms. is compatible with data for rat muscle
(Moczydlowski and Latorre, 1983). Finally, the calcium
dissociation constant, Kd, is chosen to be 100 ,uM in order
that Cai will be in the physiological range of -0.5 gM. The
value of Ca1/Kd, and hence of Kd, is a constraint imposed by

the Rorsman and Trube data and our estimate of -KCa;
previously the Chay-Keizer model had used Kd = 1 ,uM.
Fig. 6 shows the results of a calculation with the above
parameters, which should be compared with Fig. 1 c. The
simulation for a single cell shows irregular spikes of large
amplitude that range from the rest potential to nearly -10
mV. There is some evidence of abortive spiking from a
plateau, as seen in the deterministic full islet model, but no
evidence of bursting. Note that this simulation represents
only a single sample path from the set of possible realiza-
tions of the stochastic process described above, rather than
a unique solution to a set of equations as in the determinis-
tic case. Other realizations can be obtained by varying the
seed for the random number generator. The simulations
reported here are typical ones taken from the many we
have performed.

Fig. 7 a shows on an expanded time scale the portion of
Fig. 6 with an overline. Spikes which begin at the rest
potential, such as the first one in Fig. 7 a, are asymmetri-
cal, with a slow upstroke and a rapid downstroke.
Bangham et al. (1986) noted this in experimental records
and attributed the rapid downstroke to sudden stochastic
K-Ca channel openings. We believe that the downstroke is
not much more rapid than in the deterministic case (com-
pare Fig. 4 b), but rather that the upstroke is noticeably
slower because the membrane time constant is relatively
large at low voltages. Further analysis of the single-cell
behavior is deferred to Section IV where it will be
compared with results for clusters of cells.

0.

CSOO

250)

S-KCa.HC

g-KCa.JIU

Time (s)

FIGURE 6
Simulated voltage time course for an isolated single cell with
600 50 pS K-Ca channels. Compare with Fig. 1 c. Voltage range of spikes
is from the rest state to the maximum with no plateau, unlike a cell in an
intact islet (Fig. 1 a) or the solution of the deterministic model (Fig. 5 a).
The portion of the solution under the short horizontal line is expanded in
Fig. 7 a.

FIGURE 7
Simulated single cell on expanded time scale. (a) Voltage
and (b) gK1c time courses. Horizontal lines in Fig. 7 b indicate gK-C.,.
conductance level near which active phase begins and gK,Hc, conduc-
tance level near which active phase ends in deterministic model. This
discreteness of the conductance levels is clearly visible. Note that gKc. can
range far beyond the deterministic bounds.

418

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 54

1988

In the absence of glucose, an isolated ,8-cell is quiescent
(I. Atwater, personal communication). By reducing the
calcium removal rate, kca, to -0.0005 ms-' we have
obtained records of as long as 30 s without any spikes. This
is remarkable considering the large variance of -K.CI when
kc, = 0.03 ms-' as in Fig. 6. In this case, the model
predicts that Cai will approximately double to
1 1.,M. We
plan to use the model in the future to contrast the glucose
dose response of single cells and clusters of cells.

The stochastic model does a reasonable job of describing
the behavior of an isolated (-cell. In the next section we
show how to construct a cluster of stochastic ,8-cells that
bursts.

IV. CLUSTERS OF TIGHTLY
ELECTRICALLY-COUPLED CELLS

Channel Sharing Hypothesis

There is abundant experimental evidence that (3-cells in an
islet are electrically coupled, and morphological studies
show the existence of gap junctions between ,3-cells (Edd-
lestone and Rojas, 1980; Meda et al., 1984). Lucifer
Yellow dye injected into one cell through a microelectrode
usually labels a small number (2-5) of neighboring cells
(Michaels and Sheridan, 1981; Meda et al., 1986) presum-
ably by passing through the gap junctions. Current
injected in one cell produces an attenuated voltage
response in neighboring cells, up to a separation of 40 j.m
(several cell diameters). Such direct local coupling, and
perhaps other forms of coupling, contribute to long range
effects throughout the islet, as indicated by the fact that
the overall burst pattern is synchronized in cells up to 400
,m apart. This can be demonstrated by recording with two
electrodes (Meda et al., 1984). Although individual spikes
are not synchronized, even for larger separations there is
only -1 s of phase lag in the burst pattern. One mechanism
which may contribute to longer range coupling is the
accumulation and diffusion of K+ in the intercellular
space.

Since the details of the coupling mechanism are as yet
unknown, we make the assumption that (3-cells in a cluster
are sufficiently tightly coupled and that their membranes
effectively share the entire pool of K-Ca channels. While
this is an over-simplification, any amount of coupling will
produce some channel sharing. As the size of the common
pool increases the statistical variance of the K-Ca conduc-
tance, gKr, will decrease. We examine whether this
reduction in statistical variance is sufficient to produce
organized bursting.

Cluster Model (Stochastic)

We model a cluster as an ensemble of cells, identical in
their gross properties and connected by zero resistance gap
junctions. As a consequence of this idealization, the cluster
is instantaneously isopotential and the ionic concentrations
are identical in all the cells.
It also follows that the

SHERMAN ET AL.

Emergence ofBursting by Channel Sharing

surface-to-volume ratio of the cluster is independent of the
number of cells, NC.Ig Hence, Cm, IK, and Ic., which are
proportional to membrane surface area, scale with Nj.
Since IK., depends on membrane area in the deterministic
case and on the number of open channels in the stochastic
case, it also scales with Nm. One can think of such a cluster
as either a single large cell or a collection of individual cells
with perfectly synchronized electrical behavior.

With these simplifications, the deterministic and sto-
chastic models for a single cell may be easily extended to a
cluster. For the deterministic case, in fact, the cell and
cluster equations are identical. For the stochastic case, the
current balance equation needs a little care in its interpre-
tation. Letting g be the single-channel conductance and MO
the number of open channels in the ith cell, Kirchofi's law
for the cluster membrane is

dV

Nca Cm

=N-NCell(IK +ICa)- EZAX(V- VK)

Nam

(4.1)

Dividing through by Njj and multiplying and dividing the
last term by N, the number of channels per cell or channel
density, Eq. 4.1 becomes

Cm IK-Ica -kN

dV
dt

1

Na
NcAN 1

All' V-VK) (4.2)
0

or

Cm d =_-IK -ICa -gKCaP (V- VK)

(4.3)

This equation is the same as for the single-stochastic cell
(see Eq. 3.5) except that p must now be interpreted as the
fraction of open channels in the cluster, while
is the
total conductance per cell, as before. The remaining equa-
tions are unaltered. It follows from Eq. 4.2 that for a
cluster the effective change in conductance due to a
single-channel event is k/Nu,,, i.e., the event is shared
equally by the membranes of all the cells in the cluster.

We remark that the simulation is completely determined
by the values of gK-ca, N., and Nc; the values of g, N, and
N,,., can be deduced from kK, N., and N, subject only to
the consistency relations gCK-C = g * N and Nto0 = No +
N, = N. Ndl. Thus multiple interpretations can be given to
a single simulation.

THEORETICAL RESULTS

Figs. 8 a-d show the results for a sequence ofvalues ofNA,
obtained by increasing N. while keeping -KJ
fixed.
Although simulations with 5 cells give voltage records not
much different from a single cell, with 10 cells the spike
amplitude is reduced and we begin to see some incipient
bursts with spiking from a plateau. While these bursts are
clearly defined, they are irregularly spaced and of variable
duration. The 50-cell cluster shows fairly regular bursts
with fluctuations in the length of the interburst interval
and burst duration. The 167 cell cluster shows a further

419

increase in regularity. The amount of variability appears
comparable with what is seen in experimental records from
intact islets (Fig. 1 a) and large clusters (Fig. 1 b).

We now examine the process underlying the emergence
of organized bursting demonstrated in the sequence com-
prising Figs. 6-8. As discussed in Section II, in the
deterministic model gKn follows Ca, and in turn feeds
back onto the membrane potential. The voltage-gated Ca2"
and K+ currents determine a bursting window, marked as
the interval (g9KC,, gK.C,Hc) in Figs. 4 a and 5 d, within
which the total gK-Ca conductance must lie. Thus, the
transition from the silent phase to the active phase occurs
approximately when gKn reaches gKuV and the transition
from the active phase to the silent phase occurs when gK-Ca
reaches gK-C.aHC-

From Figs. 7, a and b we can see that it is not appropri-
ate to apply the bifurcation analysis of the deterministic
model in this case because gK-Ca changes rapidly on the
time scale of a single spike, violating the quasi-steady state
assumption. Indeed, single-channel events can cause the
conductance to jump over the entire deterministic burst
window (indicated by the two horizontal lines in Fig. 7 b).
Ca; (not shown) is essentially constant during this time; the
spiking is entirely due to the interaction between the
stochastic fluctations and the V-n spike generating mecha-
nism. Nonetheless, when the average gK.c
stays above
gK.C5,Hc for a sufficiently long time the cell becomes
hyperpolarized, and when gK ca stays below gKc,, spiking
can occur. Because the fluctuations in gK. are so rapid,
most bursts consist of only one or two spikes. The burst
with four spikes shown in Fig. 7 b is a relatively rare
occurrence.

In the single-cell case the changes in the mean value of
gK-c, which is determined by Cai, are overwhelmed by
statistical fluctations. Thus, Cai varies in response to the
changes in membrane potential through the voltage-depen-
dent calcium current but has little influence on gK. As
the number of cells increases, the variance of gK c.
decreases and the regulatory role of Ca; is enhanced. In
Figs. 9 a-c we have plotted the voltage, gK c,, and calcium
time courses for the case of a 50 cell cluster, the first case
shown which exhibits organized bursting (Fig. 9 a is the
same as Fig. 8 c, repeated for clarity). Although the
variance of gK&Ca is still large, its time course now visibly
follows the mean determined by Ca; and stays close to the
bursting window, except for rare large excursions. It is
perhaps not surprising that the behavior of the stochastic
model converges to that of the deterministic model as the
number of cells increases, but it is remarkable that bursts
are seen even while the stochastic fluctuations are still
quite large.

Another observation is that the variance of the minimal
values of Ca; is much smaller than that of the maximal
values, and that the minimal values are much closer to Cav
than the maximal values are to CaHC. We attribute this
asymmetry to the difference in membrane time constants

_

iooo100000 Chan

167

d

15

Time (s)

30

Voltage time courses for different sized clusters: 5, 10, 50,
FIGURE 8
and 167 cells respectively in a-d; each cell has 600 50 pS channels, as in
Figs. 6 and 7. There is a transition from irregular spiking to organized
bursting as the number of channels and hence the number of cells
increases. Burst period increases with the number of channels and
appro4ches that of the deterministic model from below. Compare c and d
with Figs. 1, a and b.

between the high-voltage active phase and the low-voltage
silent phase. During the active phase the time constant is
much smaller and the membrane potential is therefore
much more sensitive to brief perturbations. During the
silent phase the membrane response is slower, and more
sustained variations in the average conductance (which are
crudely reflected in the value of Ca;) are required to
depolarize the membrane enough to initiate spiking.

Another view of this behaivor is shown in the V-Ca,
phase plane (Fig. 9 d). (Unlike the deterministic case, in
which the V-Cai and V-9KC phase planes are essentially
interchangeable, the V-g9K
phase plane is so noisy that it
does not convey much information.) We can see that not
only is there variation in the points where the trajectory
exits from the active phase, but that there is a systematic
bias towards premature termination of the active phase.
Random fluctuations in gK c. can drive the voltage below
threshold. As the number of cells is made still larger the
points of exit from the active phase approach the homo-
clinic point, CaHC. That is, organized bursting allows
longer active phases and higher levels of intracellular
calcium. This observation suggests that bursting plays a
role in enhancing secretion. Chay and Kang (1988) make
the same point.

The above simulations demonstrate that moderately
sized clusters of cells can exhibit organized bursting and

420

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 54

1988

.-,i

I7

l

l

U

10

11_w

00

Tim. (_)

_'_.~~~~

Calcium (pl)

(a) Voltage time course for 50-cell cluster (same as Fig. 8 c).
FIGURE 9
(b) gK-c and (c) Cai plotted against time. Although variance is still large,
gK-C, follows the mean determined by Ca, much more closely than the 1, 5,
or 10 cell cases. Active phases are correlated with, but not exactly
determined by time periods when gK1c, is below gK-C., and silent phases
is above gK-c*Ac Brief, large
are correlated with periods when gKr
excursions cause only small perturbations. The variance of the maxima of
Ca; is much greater than that of the minima because of the smaller
membrane time constant during the active phase. The knee and the
homoclinic point are expressed in terms of calcium: Ca, - 0.5372 and
CaHC - 0.6146. (d) V-Ca trajectory superimposed on bifurcation
diagram. Compare with Fig. 5 d. There is a systematic bias towards
premature termination of the burst and hence short burst period because
of stochastic fluctuations in gKc-8

support the idea that the difference in behavior between
single ,8-cells and clusters is due at least in part to channel
sharing. Some caution, however, is necessary in drawing
quantitative conclusions. The set of parameters used to
generate Figs. 6-8, while perfectly defensible, was chosen
to achieve a relatively large bursting window, Ag. With
some other, not unreasonable, parameter sets that result in
a much smaller Ag, a much larger number of cells is
required to achieve regular bursting. The results also
depend on the values chosen for g and N. We cannot
completely account for the dependence of the number of
cells required for bursting on the model parameters, but we
give some partial results below.

Recall from Eq. 4.4 that the conductance perturbation
due to a single-channel event is k/N,,,1. For organized
bursting, this quantity should be small compared with Ag,
and this is guaranteed as the number of cells increases. The
width of the burst window, as measured in channel events,
is AgNc/al
Intuitively, one expects that as this quantity
increases the average duration of the silent and active
phases will increase, asymptotically approaching the val-

SHERMAN ET AL.

Emergence ofBursting by Channel Sharing

TABLE I

EFFECT OF VARYING k AND N

WHILE KEEPING gK-C FIXED

g

50
10

N

600
3,000

gK-C.

30,000
30,000

p

0.005
0.005

Na
Nta/600
N,u,/3,000

00, and this is in fact what is
ues seen in Fig. 5 as N¢d, --
seen. One also expects the emergence of regular bursting to
be facilitated by small g. Support for this prediction is
obtained below. Larger Ag should also promote the emer-
gence of bursting. This effect is much harder to study
systematically, but we have confirmed its importance for
selected cases.

A given simulation may be interpreted as corresponding
to different unitary conductances, channel densities, and
numbers of cells provided the total K-Ca conductance is
held fixed. For example, suppose the single-channel con-
ductance, g, is increased by a factor of five and the number
of channels per cell, N, is reduced by the same factor,
leaving kK.Ca unchanged. The Monte Carlo channel simula-
tion will be unchanged (provided it is started with the same
random number generator seed) but the number of cells
will increase by a factor of five. This is spelled out in Table
I.

More formally, we can say that the simulations
described in Section IV are invariant, for an arbitrary scale
factor y, under the transformation g- k/y, N-..N, but
the interpretations are different: for a given total conduc-
tance, kKc.,Q fewer cells are required for bursting if the
single-channel conductance is smaller. This conclusion
satisfies our intuition that a fine grain is more deterministic
than a coarse grain.

Suppose now that the value we use for gKCa is incorrect
because our estimate of g or of N is too small by a factor -y.
What effect would this have on our conclusions? For
example, suppose that 9K C. is doubled because we revise
our estimate for g while keeping channel density fixed. The
average fraction of channels open, p, will be automatically
halved to keep the average total K-Ca conductance in the
bursting regime. A calculation using Eqs. 3.3, 3.4, and
3.8-10 shows that if p is small and the total number of
channels, N,.,, and the mean closed time, TC, are increased
by a factor of two, the simulation will be virtually
unchanged. It follows that in order to maintain equally
regular bursting it is sufficient to double Nt,, and r,. The

TABLE II

EFFECT OF VARYING iKj
ro

N

p

50
100
50

600
600
1,200

0.005
0.0025
0.0025

Tc
ls
2s
2s

5 ms
5 ms
5 ms

gKK-C.

30,000
60,000
60,000

Nu,
N,,,/600
2N,,,/600
2NMt/ 1,200

421

upshot is that the number of cells required to achieve a
given degree of regularity of bursting would be doubled if
gK-Ca were doubled. This case corresponds to the first two
lines in Table II.

If, on the other hand the increase in gK-Ca were due to an
increase in channel density alone, the number of channels
would increase, but the number of cells would not be
changed; see line three of Table II. Table II can be
summarized formally as follows: if p is small, the Monte
Carlo simulation is invariant, to first order in p, under the
Nut,
transformation -KA -
yC'y.r*, and this multiplies the value ofNx required to
achieve a given degree of burst reularity by y. While this
adjustment in N,., and rc is sufficient to restore burst
regularity, it is not necessary. Empirically, if TC is kept
fixed, regularity can be maintained by a somewhat larger
increase in Nt.

p p/'y, NtO *

gK.C ,

We would like to be able to predict quantitatively the
effects of changing N. alone, as in Fig. 8, and of other
transformations not covered by the invariances above.
Further numerical work and analysis of the underlying
stochastic process, which can be interpreted as an Orn-
stein-Uhlenbeck process with drift (Cox and Miller, 1965),
are necessary to elucidate these relationships.

In summary, our theoretical results show that tightly
electrically coupled cells with stochastic conductances
modulated by slow variables can generate increasingly
regular bursts as the number of cells increases. We have
obtained some results about how the number of cells
needed to obtain a given level of regularity depends on the
simulation parameters. For example, (a) for fixed kK-Ca,
the number of cells required is proportional to g (Table I).
(b) For fixed N, the number of cells required is propor-
tional to -K-Ca provided rT
is adjusted in the same propor-
tion. (Table II, lines 1 and 2). (c) For fixed g, the number
of cells is independent of -K-Ca' provided TC is adjusted
(Table II, lines 1 and 3). Finally, (d) the number of cells
varies inversely, in an as yet undetermined way, with the
size of the bursting window, Ag, provided r, is adjusted.
These theoretical conclusions depend only on the qualita-
tive geometrical structure of the phase plane and the
separation into fast and slow variables. Otherwise they are
independent of the precise mechanism of bursting. In the
next section we discuss their application to the ,8-cell.

V. DISCUSSION

We have modified the Chay-Keizer model for the ,B-cell as
studied in the intact islet preparation. The model is in
reasonable agreement with known experimental measure-
ments and is simple enough to be easily modified as new
data become available. It is also robust enough under
parameter changes to reflect the natural variability of
,8-cells.
It cannot account, however, for the irregular
electrical behavior of isolated ,B-cells.

We have demonstrated a stochastic extension of the
model which can capture the behavior of single cells

(Compare Figs. 6 and 7 with Fig. 1 c), large clusters of
cells (Compare Fig. 8 c with Fig. 1 b), and whole islets
(Compare Fig. 8 d with Fig. 1 a), depending solely on the
mechanism of channel sharing. We feel that this study has
established the viability of the channel sharing hypothesis
as at least part of the explanation of this phenomenon.
Some of our conclusions depend on the values of parame-
ters which are not precisely known. We have tried to
indicate some of these dependencies in section IV, although
more work needs to be done. As further experiments are
carried out and parameter values are revised, it may turn
out that enormous numbers of cells would be required
theoretically to obtain reasonable bursts. In that case we
would have to re-evaluate the hypothesis that bursting is
the result of sharing K-Ca channels.

Our simulations also indicate a possible role for bursting
in enhancing the (3-cell's primary function of secretion. As
the number of cells coupled in a cluster increases and
bursting becomes more regular, intracellular calcium lev-
els increase. See Figs. 9 c and 5 c for the 50 cell and
deterministic cases, and see Chay and Kang (1988) Fig. 4
for a systematic study. Increased coupling caused by
prolactin has been correlated with increased insulin
secretion in vivo (Michaels, et al., 1987).

We have neglected the effect of another class of K+
channels, the ATP-blockable (K-ATP) channel (Cook and
Hales, 1984; Ashcroft et al., 1984; Ashcroft et al., 1987).
Magnus (1988) and Keizer (1987b) have investigated the
possibility that the K-ATP current regulates bursting by
calcium feedback on ADP/ATP ratios. In their model the
K-ATP conductance is a monotonically increasing, satu-
rated function of instantaneous intracellular calcium simi-
lar to the K-Ca conductance in our model, and bursting
can be obtained by replacing the K-Ca current with a
K-ATP current. Like the K-Ca channel, the role of the
K-ATP channel in bursting has been questioned because it
is rarely open in the presence of glucose. Nonetheless, there
are so many K-ATP channels present that they may carry
substantial total current. One could develop a stochastic
model for the K-ATP channel along the same lines as for
the K-Ca channel. Our theoretical results (see Tables I and
II) suggest that the smaller conductance of the ATP-
blockable channel would allow regular bursting with
smaller clusters than with the K-Ca channel. This phenom-
enon is also seen in the model of Chay and Kang (1988),
where the major stochastic effect is from the delayed-
rectifier channel. Since it is much smaller than the K-Ca
channel, bursting is achieved with many fewer cells than in
our model. Incidentally, that model also shows that it is not
necessary for the stochastic fluctuations which disrupt
bursting to result from the channel which regulates the
burst.

It is most likely that both the K-Ca and K-ATP channels
play a role in bursting. It is easy to accommodate mixed
populations of stochastic channels in our model. If one
distributes a given amount of total maximal conductance

422

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 54

1988

between two populations of channels, it can be shown that
the variance of the total slow potassium conductance will
be intermediate between those of the pure populations. The
same analysis shows that even if most of the potassium
current is carried by the smaller K-ATP channels, the
variance of the larger K-Ca channels may still be consider-
able. Simulations, along the lines described in the previous
section, with a single stochastic K-Ca channel and a
deterministic slow potassium conductance show that bursts
can be disrupted if the stochastic channel opens near
threshold during spiking. The impact of this effect depends
on the rate of openings per unit time of the stochastic
channel and the size of the mean open time of the channel
relative to the membrane time constant. The conclusion we
draw from this simulation is that any model for the p-cell
bursting mechanism must be able to tolerate the perturba-
tions caused by the K-Ca channels.

We realize that our model for coupling is very idealized.
We ignore the gap junctional resistance which would cause
time delays in, and attenuation of, the influence of cells on
their neighbors. We also ignore heterogeneity in the prop-
erties of cells as oscillators. These neglected factors would
tend to weaken the coupling, reduce the degree of synchro-
nization of the ,B-cells in the islet, and render it more
difficult for moderate-sized clusters of cells to exhibit
regular bursting. Nevertheless, we feel that the model
presented here sheds light on the behavior of small clusters
of tightly-coupled cells, such as are revealed by dye
coupling experiments. Further, we feel that one way to
understand the emergence of organized bursting in large
cell clusters and islets is through the coupling of these small
clusters by accumulation and diffusion of K+ in intercellu-
lar spaces. We hope to assess the role of such factors with
more detailed models which may include resistive gap
junctions, ionic diffusion, and perhaps individual variabil-
ity in one or more key parameters.

We have made other simplifications which are probably
not important for the conclusions. Our model for the
handling of the calcium that comes into the cell is crude.
There has been much speculation and theoretical modeling
about small domains with high local concentrations of
Ca2" near the cell membrane (Chad and Eckert, 1984;
Simon and Llinas, 1985). This has been offered as an
alternative explanation for the fact that the K-Ca channels
are open so infrequently at the typical free intracellular
calcium concentrations (Velasco and Petersen, 1987). We
have ignored this issue partly for simplicity, and partly
because we wanted to investigate whether infrequently
open channels could play a role in the cell without invoking
other hypotheses.

Some known features have been left out of the model.
There is a small amount of inactivation, perhaps Ca2"
dependent, of the Ca2+ channel (Plant, 1987). As men-
tioned in Section II, the appropriate way to model the
calcium current needs further study. There is also some
voltage-dependent inactivation of the delayed-rectifier

channel, which we have found to be unimportant. We have
ignored the voltage dependence (Cook et al., 1984; Findlay
et al., 1985; Velasco and Petersen, 1987) and time constant
of the K-Ca channel because we feel that the existing data
in the low voltage and low calcium regime do not justify
quantitative modeling at this time.

We hope that this study will be provocative to experi-
mentalists. The viability of channel sharing is critically
dependent on the size of the bursting window, Ag, which in
turn depends sensitively on the reversal potentials VK and
Vc,, and the dynamic parameters for the voltage-gated
potassium and calcium channels, VI' and X. We know of no
measurements of the range of K-Ca conductance experi-
enced during a burst; our deterministic spike dynamics
constrain it to lie in the interval (150 pS, 200 pS) if gK =
2,500 pS and kca = 1,400 pS. Our results also depend on
the values of gK-C*, 70, rC N, g, and p. The product PgK-CI
must lie within the bursting interval; with g
= 30,000
pS p must be -0.005. This figure is not incompatible with
experimental values obtained so far (Findlay,
1985;
Velasco and Petersen, 1987). We made reasonable guesses
for the values of the mean open and closed times, TO and rc,
and for the channel density since values for these quantities
have not been reported. Our value for ro of -5 ms is
compatible with data from rat muscle (Moczydlowski and
Latorre, 1983).

It would be helpful to have reliable values fo the ,B-cell,
although we found that, with the parameters used here, the
numerical results showed little qualitative change as Tc was
varied from 250 ms to 30 s. (We have found other cases in
which the value of rC does make a significant difference.)
There is a large discrepancy in the measured unitary
conductance of the K-Ca channel depending on whether
symmetrical and unsymmetrical K+ solutions are used
(Atwater et al., 1988), and it would be useful if the
physiologically relevant value were determined. Of course,
the values for all these parameters are constrained to be
consistent with each other; for example, it is necessary that
gK-Ca = PgK-Ca, P = TO/(Tr + TC) and gK-Ca = kN.

In addition to obtaining this valuable information on the
channel level, it would be most helpful to have additional
experimental confirmation of the predictions of the model
by systematically recording from clusters of reaggregated
cells. If the model is correct, one should be able to observe
abortive bursts and drift in burst period over long runs.
Perhaps it is even possible to measure the regularity of
bursting as a function of cluster size. Cells from mice
injected with glyburide show increased gap junctions as
measured by dye coupling (Meda et al., 1979; Meda et al.,
1984). Thus, one might create artificial clusters with a
high degree of coupling and varying numbers of cells, like
the theoretical ones here. The variance of burst and silent
phase duration could then be measured and compared with
numerical results from the model. The extent of coupling
can also be dramatically increased by prolactin (Michaels
et al., 1987). Similar experiments (Clay and DeHaan,

SHERMAN ET AL.

Emergence ofBursting by Channel Sharing

423

1979) have been performed on chick heart ventricular cells
which are tightly coupled and exhibit rhythmic pacemaker
activity. The variance of the interbeat interval was shown
experimentally to decrease as N-'12, where N is the
number of cells in the cluster. This result has been
supported theoretically by simulations of stochastic sodium
and potassium channels in patches of squid axon ofvarying
area (Clay and DeFelice, 1983). Even qualitative data of
this type for the $-cell could be of great help in understand-
ing synchrony and evaluating the channel-sharing hypoth-
esis.

APPENDIX

Equations and Parameters

Equations for the Deterministic Model:
Cm(dV/dt) - - gKn (V- VK) - kcamj (V)h(V) (V - Vca)

- gK-ca(Caj)(V - VK),
dn/dt - X [n.(V) - n(V)],
dCa./dt =f(- aIc - kc Cai),

where
gK-ca (Ca;) = gKc. (Ca,/Kd + Ca;),

m.,(V) - 1/1 + exp ([Vm - VI/Sm),
h(V) = 1/1 + exp ([V - VhJ/Sh),
n.,(v) = 1/1 + exp ([V. - V]/S,),r,(V)

- c/exp ([V - fl/a) + exp (-[V-fV/b),

and

a= 1/2 VceF.
Standard Parameter Values2

Parameter

Definition/first use

Numerical value

F (Coul/mMol)

units
r (Osm)
Cm (fF)
V., (M,m3)
V, (mV)
Sm, (mV)
V, (mV)
S. (mV)
a (mV)
b (mV)
c (ms)
V(mV)
Vk (mV)
Sh (mV)
gK (pS)
jc. (pS)
VK (mV)
VC. (mV)

X

Kd (AM)
giK-C (pS)
kc, (ms-')

f

Cell radius

Total capacitance

Cell volume

Faraday constant

Eq. 2.1
Eq. 2.1
Eq. 2.2
Eq. 2.2
Eq. 2.3
Eq. 2.3
Eq. 2.3
Eq. 2.3
Eq. 2.4
Eq. 2.4
Eq. 2.5
Eq. 2.5
Eq. 2.5
Eq. 2.5
Eq.2.7
Eq. 2.8a
Eq. 2.9
Eq. 2.10
Eq. 2.10

6.5
5,310
1,150
96.487

4
14
-15
5.6
65
20
60
-75
-10
10
2,500
1,400
-75
+110
1.7
100
30,000
0.001
0.03

2These values used except where noted in texct.

424

The authors would like to thank Dr. Jacob Maizel, Chief of the
Laboratory of Mathematical Biology, National Cancer Institute, and the
staff of the Advanced Scientific Computing Laboratory, in Frederick,
Maryland for providing the computer time and technical support neces-
sary for the successful completion of this project.
J. E. Keizer gratefully acknowledges supports from the National Science
Foundation grant CHE 86-18647, the John Simon Guggenheim Memo-
rial Foundation, a sabbatical leave form the University of California,
Davis, and the hospitality of the Mathematical Research Branch at the
National Institutes of Helath.
The work of A. S. Sherman was supported by a National Research
Council-National Institutes of Health Research Associateship.
Received for publication 25 January 1988 and in final form II April
1988.

REFERENCES

Ashcroft, F. M., D. E. Harrison, and S. J. H. Aschroft. 1984. Glucose
induces closure of single potassium channels in isolated rat pancreatic
B-cells. Nature (Lond.). 312:446-448.

Ashcroft, F. M. 1987. Adenosine 5'-triphosphate-sensitive potassium

channels. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 11:97-118.

Atwater, I., C. M. Dawson, A. Scott, G. Eddlestone, and E. Rojas. 1980.
The nature of the oscillatory behavior in electrical activity for
pancreatic ,-cell. J. ofHorm. Metabol. Res. 10 (suppl.):100-107.

Atwater, I., L. Rosario, and E. Rojas. 1983. Properties of calcium-
activated potassium channels in the pancreatic a-cell. Cell Calcium.
4:451-461.

Atwater, I., and J. Rinzel. 1986. the ,-cell bursting pattern and intracel-
lular calcium. In Ionic Channels in Cells and Model Systems. R.
Latorre, editor. Plenum Publishing Co., New York and London.
353-362.

Atwater, I., M. X. Li, E. Rojas, and A. Stutzin. 1988. Glucose reduces
both ATP-blockable and Ca-activated K-channel activity in cell-
attached patches from rat pancreatic B-cells in culture. Biophys. J.
53:145a. (Abstr.)

Bangham, J. A., P. A. Smith, and P. C. Croghan. 1986. Modeling the
beta-cell electrical activity. In Biophysics of the Pancreatic #-Cell. I.
Atwater, E. Rojas, and B. Soria, editors. Plenum Publishing Co., New
York and London. 265-278.

Barrett, J. N., K. L. Magleby, and B. S. Pallotta. 1982. Properties of
single calcium-activated potassium channels in cultured rat muscle. J.
Physiol. (Lond.). 331:211-230.

Beigelman, P. M., B. Ribalet, and I. Atwater, 1977. Electrical activity of
mouse pancreatic beta-cells. II. Effects of glucose and arginine. J.
Physiol. (Paris). 73:201-217.

Chad, J. E., and R. Eckert. 1984. Calcium domains associated with
individual channels can account for anomalous voltage relations of
Ca-dependent responses. Biophys. J. 45:993-999.

Chay, T. R., and J. Keizer. 1983. Minimal model for membrane

oscillations in the pancreatic #-cell. Biophys. J. 42:181-190.

Chay, T. R., and J. Keizer. 1985. Theory of the effect of extracellular
potassium on oscillations in the pancreatic ,B-cell. Biophys. J. 48:815-
827.

Chay, T. R., and H. S. Kang. 1988. Role of Single-Channel Stochastic
Noise on Bursting Clusters of Pancreatic ,8-Cells. Biophys. J. 54:427-
435.

Clay, J. R., and R. L. DeHaan. 1979. Fluctuations in interbeat interval in

rhythmic heart-cell clusters. Biophys. J. 28:377-390.

Clay, J. R., and L. J. DeFelice. 1983. Relationship between membrane
excitability and single-channel open-close kinetics. Biophys. J. 42:15 1-
157.

Cook, D. L., and C. N. Hales. 1984. Intracellular ATP directly blocks K'

channels in pancreatic B-cells. Nature (Lond.). 311:271-273.

Cook, D. L., M. Ikeuchi, and W. Y. Fujimoto. 1984. Lowering of pH
inhibits calcium-activated potassium channels in isolated rat pan-
creatic islet cells. Nature (Lond.). 311:269-271.

BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL VOLUME 54

1988

Cox, D. R., and H. D. Miller. 1965. The Theory of Stochastic Processes.

John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York.

Dean, P. M., and E. K. Mathews. 1970. Glucose-induced electrical

activity in pancreatic islet cells J. Physiol. (Lond.). 210:255-264.

Doedel, E. 1981. AUTO: A program for the automatic bifurcation

analysis of autonomous systems. Cong. Num. 30:265-284.

Eddlestone, G. T., and E. Rojas. 1980. Evidence of electrical coupling

between mouse pancreatic #-cells. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 303:76-77P.

Findlay, I., M. J. Dunne, and 0. H. Peterson. 1985. High-conductance
K' channel in pancreatic islet cells can be activated and inactivated by
internal calcium. J. Membr. Biol. 83:169-175.

Fitzhugh, R. 1961. Impulses and physiological states in theoretical

models of nerve membrane. Biophys. J. 1:445-466.

Meda, P., R. M. Santos, and I. Atwater. 1986. Direct identification of
electrophysiologically monitored cells within intact mouse Islets of
Langerhans. Diabetes. 35:232-236.

Michaels, R. L., and J. D. Sheridan. 1981. Islets of Langerhans: dye
coupling among immunocytochemically distinct cell types. Science
(Wash., DC). 214:801-803.

Michaels, R. L., R. L. Sorenson, J. A. Parsons, and J. D. Sheridan. 1987.
Prolactin enhances cell-to-cell communication among ,-cells in pan-
creatic islets. Diabetes. 36:1098-1102.

Moczydlowski, E., and R. Latorre. 1983. Gating kinetics of Ca2`-
activated K+ channels from rat muscle incorporated into planar lipid
bilayers. J. Gen. Physiol. 82:511-542.

Morris, C., and H. Lecar. 1981. Voltage oscillations in the barnacle giant

Gear, C. W. 1967. The numerical integration of ordinary differential

muscle fiber. Biophys. J. 35:193-213.

equations. Math. Comp. 21:146-156.

Plant, R. E. 1978. The effects of calcium+ + on bursting neurons. A

Goldman, D. E. 1943. Potential, impedance, and rectifications in mem-

modeling study. Biophys. J. 21:217-237.

branes. J. Gen. Physiol. (Lond.). 27:36-60.

Hodgkin, A. L., and B. Katz. 1949. The effect of sodium ions on the
electrical activity of the giant axon of the squid. J. Physiol. (Lond.).
108:37-77.

Kay, A. R., and R. K. S. Wong. 1987. Calcium current activation kinetics
in isolated pyramidal neurones of the CAI region of the mature
guinea-pig hippocampus, J. Physiol. (Lond.). 392:603-616.

Keizer, J. E. 1987. Statistical Thermodynamics of Nonequilibrium

Processes. Springer-Verlag, New York. 135-138.

Keizer, J. E. 1988. Electrical activity and insulin release in pancreatic

beta cells. Math. Biosci. In press.

Magnus, J. 1988. PhD Thesis. University of California, Davis. In press.
Meda, P., A. Perrelet, and A. Orci. 1979. Increase of gap junctions
between pancreatic ,B-cells during stimulation of insulin secretion. J.
Cell Biol. 82:441-448.

Meda, P., I. Atwater, A. Goncalves, A. Bangham, L. Orci, and E. Rojas.
1984. The topography of electrical synchrony among ,B-cells in the
mouse Islet of Langerhans. Q. J. Exp. Physiol. 69:719-735.

Plant, T. D. 1987. Calcium current inactivation in cultured mouse
(Lond.).

is calcium-dependent. J. Physiol.

cells

pancreatic islet
390:86P.

Rinzel, J. 1985. Bursting oscillations in an excitable membrane model. In
Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations. B. D. Sleeman and R. J.
Jarvis, editors. Springer-Verlag, New York. 304-316.

Rorsman, P., and G. Trube. 1986. Calcium and delayed potassium
currents in mouse pancreatic a-cells under voltage clamp conditions. J.
Physiol. (Lond.). 375:531-550.

Rubin, R. P. 1982. Calcium and Cellular Secretion. Plenum Publishing

Co., New York and London.

Simon, S. M., and R. R. Llinas. 1985. Compartmentalization of the
submembrane calcium activity during calcium influx and its signifi-
cance in transmitter release. Biophys. J. 48:485-498.

Velasco, J. M., and 0. H. Petersen. 1987. Voltage-activation of high-
conductance K+ channel in the insulin-secreting cell line RINm5F is
dependent on local extracellular Ca2" concentration. Biochim. Bio-
phys. Acta. 896:305-310.

SHERMAN ET AL.

Emergence ofBursting by Channel Sharing

425

