Compartmental Model of Vertebrate Motoneurons for Ca 2/-Dependent
Spiking and Plateau Potentials Under Pharmacological Treatment

VICTORIA BOOTH, 1 JOHN RINZEL, 1 AND OLE KIEHN 2
1Mathematical Research Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes
of Health 9190, Bethesda, Maryland 20814; and 2Section of Neurophysiology, Department of Physiology, The Panum
Institute, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

I N T R O D U C T I O N

a nonuniform distribution of ionic conductances, and they predict
modulatory effects of 5-HT and properties of plateau activation
that have yet to be tested experimentally.

Booth, Victoria, John Rinzel, and Ole Kiehn. Compartmental
model of vertebrate motoneurons for Ca 2/-dependent spiking and
plateau potentials under pharmacological treatment. J. Neurophys-
iol. 78: 3371–3385, 1997. In contrast to the limited response prop-
erties observed under normal experimental conditions, spinal moto-
neurons generate complex ﬁring patterns, such as Ca 2/-dependent
regenerative spiking and plateaus, in the presence of certain neuro-
transmitters and ion-channel blockers. We have developed a quanti-
Vertebrate motoneurons possess a variety of ionic conduc-
tative motoneuron model, based on turtle motoneuron data, to
tances that under normal conditions give rise to a relatively
investigate the roles of speciﬁc ionic currents and the effects of
limited ﬁring repertoire characterized by fast action poten-
their soma and dendritic distribution in generating these complex
tials (APs) and smooth rate regulation in response to intra-
ﬁring patterns. In addition, the model is used to explore the effects
cellular current injection or synaptic activation (Binder et
of multiple ion channel blockers and neurotransmitters that are
al. 1996; Schwindt and Crill 1984). In the presence of certain
known to modulate motoneuron ﬁring patterns. To represent the
ion channel blockers or neurotransmitters, more complex
distribution of ionic currents across the soma and dendrites, the
ﬁring patterns can be evoked. For example, in serotonin
model contains two compartments. The soma compartment, repre-
(5-HT) and norepinephrine, cat (Conway et al. 1988; Houns-
senting the soma and proximal dendrites, contains Hodgkin-Hux-
ley-like sodium (INa) and delayed rectiﬁer K/ (IK0dr) currents, an
gaard et al. 1988a; Lee and Heckman 1996b) and turtle
N-like Ca 2/ current (ICa0N), and a calcium-dependent K/ current motoneurons (Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1989) can be shifted
[IK(Ca)]. The dendritic compartment, representing the lumped distal
between two stable modes of ﬁring, differing in frequency
dendrites, contains, in addition to ICa0N and IK(Ca) as in the soma,
by up to 10 Hz, by short-lasting excitatory and inhibitory
a persistent L-like calcium current (ICa0L). We determined kinetic
inputs. This bistable ﬁring, which is also found in single-
parameters for INa, IK0dr, ICa0N, and IK(Ca) in order to reproduce
unit recordings in intact animals (Eken and Kiehn 1989),
normal action-potential ﬁring observed in turtle spinal motoneu-
endows motoneurons with a mechanism for translating short-
rons, including fast and slow afterhyperpolarizations (AHPs) and
lasting synaptic inputs into long-lasting motor output (see
a linear steady-state frequency-current relation. With this parameter
Kiehn 1991b for a review). The recent demonstration that
set as default, a sequence of pharmacological manipulations were
selective depletion of descending monoaminergic ﬁbers from
systematically simulated. A small reduction of IK0dr [mimicking
the brain stem to the spinal cord results in a substantial
the experimental effect of tetraethylammonium (TEA) in low con-
reduction in tonic motoneuron activity in antigravity muscle
centration] enhanced the slow AHP and caused calcium spiking
(mediated by ICa0N) when INa was blocked. Firing patterns observed
suggests that monoamine-induced bistable ﬁring is active in
experimentally in high TEA [and tetrodotoxin (TTX)], namely
the up-right position (Kiehn et al. 1996). When the sodium
calcium spikes riding on a calcium plateau, were reproduced only
spike generating mechanism is blocked with tetrodotoxin
when both IK0dr and IK(Ca) were reduced. Dendritic plateau poten-
(TTX), an underlying plateau potential responsible for the
tials, mediated by ICa0L, were reliably unmasked when IK(Ca) was
bistable ﬁring is revealed. The plateau-generating current has
reduced, mimicking the experimental effect of the bee venom
been identiﬁed as a persistent, inward, calcium-dependent
apamin. The effect of 5-HT, which experimentally induces the
(Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1985; Schwindt and Crill 1984),
ability to generate calcium-dependent plateau potentials but not
and nifedipine-sensitive current (Hounsgaard and Kiehn
calcium spiking, was reproduced in the model by reducing IK(Ca)
1989; Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988), making it likely to be
alone. The plateau threshold current level, however, was reduced
substantially if a simultaneous increase in ICa0L was simulated, mediated by an L-like calcium conductance. Plateau poten-
suggesting that serotonin (5-HT) induces plateau potentials by
tials, similar to those induced by 5-HT and norepinephrine,
regulating more than one conductance. The onset of the plateau
are also seen after blocking outward potassium currents
potential showed signiﬁcant delays in response to near-threshold,
(Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988; Schwindt and Crill 1980a–
depolarizing current steps. In addition, the delay times were sensi-
c). In particular, the bee venom apamin, which blocks the
calcium-dependent K/ current underlying the slow afterhy-
tive to the current step amplitude. The delay and its sensitivity were
explained by examining the model’s behavior near the threshold for
perpolarization (AHP) (Hounsgaard et al. 1988b; Zhang and
plateau onset. This modeling study thus accurately accounts for
Krnjevic 1987), elicits plateau potentials in turtle motoneu-
the basic ﬁring behavior of vertebrate motoneurons as well as a
rons with an appearance similar to those induced by 5-HT
range of complex ﬁring patterns invoked by ion-channel blockers
(Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1989; Hounsgaard and Mintz
and 5-HT. In addition, our computational results support the hy-
1988). In contrast, high concentrations of tetraethylammo-
pothesis that the electroresponsiveness of motoneurons depends on

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

3371

3372

V. BOOTH, J. RINZEL, AND O. KIEHN

gaard et al. 1988b; Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1989; Hounsgaard and
nium (TEA) induce the ability to generate both plateau po-
tentials and Ca 2/-based spiking (Hounsgaard and Mintz
Mintz 1988). Sodium (INa) and potassium delayed rectiﬁer (IK0dr)
1988). The Ca 2/-based spiking is most likely mediated by
conductances contribute to AP generation in the standard Hodgkin-
an N-like Ca 2/ conductance.
Huxley manner. An inactivating, high threshold, N-like calcium
conductance (ICa0N), which is similar to high-voltage–activated
The biophysical mechanisms for the induction of these Ca 2/ currents found in cat spinal (Powers 1993; Schwindt and
Ca 2/-dependent
regenerative responses by ion channel Crill 1984) and in rat hypoglossal motoneurons (Umemiya and
blockers and monoamines have not, however, been ade- Berger 1994; Viana et al. 1993a), allows calcium inﬂux during
quately identiﬁed. We have therefore developed a compart- APs. Also included in the model is a calcium-dependent potassium
mental motoneuron model, based on turtle motoneuron data,
conductance [IK(Ca)] that contributes to the slow AHP following a
to investigate the roles of the ionic currents responsible for
spike. These four conductances are responsible for AP generation.
these Ca 2/-dependent responses and the effect of their soma
The ﬁnal conductance included in the model is a persistent, low-
threshold, L-like calcium conductance (ICa0L), which, in turtle mo-
and dendritic distribution. Some previous models were de-
toneurons, generates plateau potentials observed in the presence of
veloped to explore bistable ﬁring in vertebrate motoneurons,
5-HT and potassium channel blockers. This conductance corre-
including an idealized, equivalent cylinder, cable model
sponds to the low-threshold, persistent calcium conductance pre-
(Gutman 1991), an isopotential (or single compartment),
viously described in cat spinal motoneurons (Schwindt and Crill
threshold-crossing model (Powers 1993), and simple and
1984).
more detailed two-compartment models (Booth and Rinzel
1995; Lee and Heckman 1996a). The present modeling
study, in contrast, is the ﬁrst to investigate the effects exerted
by multiple ion channel blockers and neurotransmitters that
account for a variety of complex ﬁring behaviors experimen-
tally observed in turtle motoneurons during a sequence of
pharmacological experiments.

Experimental results in both turtle and cat motoneurons have
indicated that active conductances in the dendrites participate in
the generation of bistable ﬁring patterns observed in 5-HT and
norepinephrine (Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1993; Lee and Heckman
1996b). The turtle motoneuron experiments have further identiﬁed
both N-like and L-like calcium conductances (Hounsgaard and
Mintz 1988) at dendritic locations (Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1993).
In our previous, minimal model, we investigated whether the segre-
gation of plateau-generating conductances to a dendritelike com-
partment that was electrically distal from a sodium spike-generat-
ing compartment could account for the bistable ﬁring behavior
observed under 5-HT (Booth and Rinzel 1995). The results from
the minimal model supported a dendritic origin for the plateau
conductance. In the present enhanced model, we retain the two
compartment structure of our previous model and the general no-
tion of segregating the sodium-spiking mechanisms from the pla-
teau-generating mechanisms. Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram
of the enhanced model. The soma compartment contains the four
conductances responsible for the generation of sodium APs,
whereas the dendrite compartment holds the two calcium conduc-
tances and the calcium-dependent potassium conductance.

The precise effects of 5-HT on the ionic conductances of
turtle motoneurons are not known (Hounsgaard and Kiehn
1989, 1993). Its primary effect has been suggested to be a
reduction of the Ca 2/-dependent K/ current [IK ( Ca )] that
mediates the slow AHP of APs since there is a visible de-
crease in the slow AHP in the presence of 5-HT (Hounsgaard
and Kiehn 1989). It is known, however, that 5-HT can affect
multiple conductances in other vertebrate motoneurons
(Kiehn 1991a; McLarnon 1995). We therefore used the
model to explore possible effects of 5-HT on conductances
other than IK ( Ca ), such as the L-like Ca 2/ conductance, which
is a logical target for 5-HT given its role in plateau genera-
tion. In particular, we investigated and compared changes
in plateau properties obtained in the model in response to
variation of the Ca 2/-dependent K/ and the L-like Ca 2/
conductance levels. Varying the maximum conductances for
these currents simulated not only different actions of 5-HT
on the conductances but also different concentrations of
5-HT, thus predicting experiments that may help distinguish
effects of 5-HT on turtle motoneuron conductances.

For each active conductance in the model, differential equations
generate the time and voltage dependencies of the activation and
inactivation gates, with Boltzman equations describing their
steady-state voltage dependencies. The parameters for the gating
kinetics have been qualitatively determined, because precise, quan-
titative measurements for most parameters are not available for
turtle motoneurons (Hounsgaard et al. 1988b; Hounsgaard and
Kiehn 1989; Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988). For this study, we
assigned parameters based on the qualitative and quantitative mea-
Finally, the model is used to analyze some key features of
surements available (see following paragraphs) and then tuned
the plateau activation, including delays in plateau onset, in
these values to obtain good ﬁts with the normal ﬁring behavior
some cases lasting over a second, observed in response to near-
and pharmacologically altered behaviors observed experimentally.
threshold current steps, and the slow rise of the voltage to the A listing of the model equations and parameter values is given in
plateau state once plateau activation has been initiated. These
the APPENDIX. The results shown in Figs. 2–6 were obtained by
voltage and time dependencies of the plateau activation have
numerically integrating the model equations with a variable time-
led to suggestions that the activation time constant of the L-
step Gear method (see APPENDIX ). In the following paragraphs,
like Ca 2/ conductance underlying the plateau may be slow in
we discuss in more detail the kinetics of our model conductances
and the electronic-like properties of the model. The sensitivities of
motoneurons, perhaps on the order of 100 ms (Powers 1993;
our results on parameter values is discussed throughout RESULTS.
Schwindt and Crill 1984). Our model analysis indicated that
these features may be obtained with a relatively fast activation
time constant of the plateau-generating current.

Sodium and potassium delayed rectiﬁer conductances

Some of these results have been presented in short form

(Booth and Rinzel 1996; Booth et al. 1996).

M E T H O D S
General description of the model

The model includes most of the ionic conductances that have
been experimentally identiﬁed in turtle spinal motoneurons (Houns-

The sodium and potassium delayed rectiﬁer conductances have
standard Hodgkin-Huxley-like activation and inactivation kinetics.
The sodium conductance is governed by the usual m3h gating vari-
ables with instantaneous activation and time-dependent inactiva-
tion. The potassium delayed rectiﬁer conductance activates as n 4,
where the gating variable n is both time and voltage dependent.
Parameters for the kinetics of these conductances are based on

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF VERTEBRATE MOTONEURONS

3373

FIG. 1. Schematic diagram of 2-compartment vertebrate
motoneuron model. The soma compartment contains ionic
conductances that generate action potentials. The dendrite
compartment contains conductances responsible for plateau
generation. Current spread between the compartments is
through the coupling conductance gc. Model equations and
parameter values are given in the APPENDIX.

the strength of activation, it can vary from 30 ms to several 100
ms. Our model simulations, however, do not produce accurate
plateau potential proﬁles with a very slow activation time constant.
In particular, with a very large time constant, we obtain plateau
activation slopes that are much shallower than experimentally ob-
served. We further discuss the effects of this time constant on the
behavior of plateau potentials in RESULTS. For this study, a rela-
tively fast time constant of 40 ms is used.

Intracellular calcium concentration

The intracellular Ca 2/ concentration (measured in mM) is mod-
eled separately in each compartment according to the following
balance equation

dCax
dt

(cid:129) f [0aICa 0 kCaCax]

(1)
where x (cid:129) S or D for the soma or dendrite compartment, respec-
f is the percent of free to bound Ca 2/. The
tively. The constant
parameter a converts the total Ca 2/ current in the compartment,
ICa, to Ca 2/ concentration. (This parameter implicitly contains the
ratio of surface area to volume for each compartment, but, because
our model crudely reduces neuronal structure to only 2 compart-
ments, a strict geometric interpretation of this parameter is inappro-
priate.) The constant kCa represents the Ca 2/ removal rate, where
Ca 2/ is removed by uptake into internal stores or pump extrusion.

Electrotonic-like properties of the two-compartment model

The electrotonic-like properties of the two-compartment model
are determined by two parameters: the coupling conductance gc,
which regulates current ﬂow between the compartments, and the
parameter p, which is the ratio of somatic surface area to total
surface area. Appropriate values for these parameters cannot be
directly derived from geometric and passive electrical properties
of motoneurons. To determine these parameters, the nonlinear in-
teractions of the ionic conductances in both compartments must
also be considered (see Pinsky and Rinzel 1994 for a discussion).
The default value of the parameter p is set to 0.1, estimating that
the soma has 1/10 the surface area of the entire motoneuron. Al-
though there are no data on the soma/dendrite area ratio for turtle
motoneurons, surface area measurements of cat motoneurons range
from 250,000 to 750,000 mm2 with the soma accounting for be-
tween 6,000 and 15,000 mm2 (Lu¨scher and Clamann 1992). Thus
the value of p might be too high, but qualitatively similar results
to those described in this study can be obtained with smaller values
of p.
The default value of the coupling conductance, gc (cid:129) 0.1 mS/
cm2, was chosen to provide a fairly weak coupling current between

those from an early, multicompartmental motoneuron model devel-
oped by Traub (Traub 1977; Traub and Llinas 1977) but were
modiﬁed to incorporate more recent data obtained in cat spinal
motoneurons (Schwindt and Crill 1984) and rat motoneurons (Ta-
kahashi 1990b; Viana et al. 1993b). Some differences in our pa-
rameter values from those in Traub’s (1977) model include a
depolarizing shift in half-activation of the delayed rectiﬁer conduc-
tance, hyperpolarizing shifts in the reversal potential for potassium
and in sodium half-inactivation, and a slower maximum time con-
stant for sodium inactivation resulting in slower deinactivation of
the Na/ conductance.

N-like calcium conductance

The N-like calcium conductance gating is given by m 2

NhN with
both activation mN and inactivation hN having voltage and time
dependencies. Only qualitative data are available for the kinetic
parameters of this conductance in turtle motoneurons (Hounsgaard
and Mintz 1988), but the parameters describing activation corre-
spond well to those used in a recent model by Powers (1993) to
characterize the high-threshold calcium conductance found in cat
motoneurons. Our choice for parameter values was inﬂuenced by
achieving appropriate behaviors in AP and calcium-based spiking.

Calcium-dependent potassium conductance

The calcium-dependent potassium [K(Ca)] conductance acti-
vates instantaneously according to the Hill expression with expo-
nent 1

Cax

Cax / Kd

where Cax (x (cid:129) S or D) deﬁnes the intracellular calcium concentra-
tion (in mM) in the soma and dendrite compartments, respectively,
and the half-saturation level is given by the constant Kd. The expo-
nent 1 in this expression was fundamental in obtaining a linear
frequency-current relation for AP ﬁring. Note that this conductance
does not depend on voltage directly, but only indirectly through the
calcium conductances mediating Ca 2/ inﬂux to the compartment.

L-like calcium conductance

The L-like calcium current is persistent with activation deter-
mined by the time- and voltage-dependent gating variable mL. It
has a low threshold for activation, below that of our N-like Ca 2/
conductance, similar to the persistent, low-threshold Ca 2/ conduc-
tance in cat motoneurons and as suggested by plateau behavior in
turtle motoneurons (Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988). The time course
of activation of the persistent Ca 2/ conductance in cat motoneurons
is slow (Powers 1993; Schwindt and Crill 1984); depending on

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

3374

V. BOOTH, J. RINZEL, AND O. KIEHN

compartments, which was determined necessary to generate a bista-
ble ﬁring behavior in previous two-compartment models (Booth
and Rinzel 1995; Lee and Heckman 1996a). This value of gc yields
much greater voltage attenuation in the dendrite compartment in
response to steady somatic depolarization than has been experimen-
tally estimated in vertebrate motoneurons. For example, dendritic
voltage in our model under control conditions displays (cid:130)70% de-
cay compared with estimates of 15–40% decay in distal, passive
dendrites of cat gamma motoneurons (Burke et al. 1994) and esti-
mates of 20% decay in distal, passive dendrites of guinea pig vagal
motoneurons (Nitzan et al. 1990) in response to steady somatic
depolarization. However, larger values of gc, which reduce the
steady voltage attenuation observed in the dendrite compartment
under control conditions, destroy plateau potential generation when
5-HT is simulated. For example, when gc was doubled (gc (cid:129) 0.2
mS/cm2), which yielded a voltage attenuation in the dendrite com-
partment of 51%, the model displayed plateau potentials only in a
very narrow range of applied current values that did not correspond
to experimental observations. Furthermore, when gc was tripled
(gc (cid:129) 0.3 mS/cm2), steady voltage attenuation in the dendrite
compartment showed a 42% decay, but the model did not display
bistable ﬁring behavior for any applied current values.

R E S U L T S

As a ﬁrst test of the robustness of our model, we searched
for a set of maximum conductance density values that repro-
duce normal spiking behavior in response to long-lasting
current steps. This set of control conductance densities is
given in Table 1. The effect of ion channel blockers and
neurotransmitters was then simulated by varying these con-
trol conductance values in a systematic manner to account
for a sequence of pharmacological experiments.

Normal spiking behavior

FIG. 2. Sodium spike behavior obtained in model under control condi-
tions and in simulated tetraethylammonium (TEA). A, B, and D: voltage
responses measured in soma (top trace) and dendrite (middle trace) com-
partments shown in response to injected current pulse (bottom trace). A and
B: normal sodium action-potential ﬁring in control conditions in response to
near-threshold (A, Iapp (cid:129) 6 mA/cm2) and larger current steps (B, Iapp (cid:129)
11 mA/cm2). C: steady-state (solid) and 1st interspike interval (dotted)
frequency-current relations for action-potential ﬁring. Filled circles indicate
steady-state frequencies in A and B. Figures 2–9 and A1: control conduc-
tance density values (Table 1) used except where noted. D: sodium-based
spikes obtained in simulated low-concentration TEA (gK0dr (cid:129) 34 mS/cm2,
Iapp (cid:129) 11 mA/cm2).

With the control conductance values, the model displays
spiking behavior that resembles normal experimental AP
ual ionic currents to AP generation, a dissection of an AP
ﬁring. Figure 2A shows low-frequency ﬁring obtained with
is shown in Fig. A1 in the APPENDIX.) The contribution of
the model in response to an injected current pulse near the
the two potassium conductances to spike proﬁle is illustrated
ﬁring threshold. Note that the full-sized AP generated in the
by a comparison of the higher frequency control APs in Fig.
soma compartment (top trace) invokes a small excursion in
2B with those in Fig. 2D, where a low concentration of
dendritic voltage (middle trace). The model APs possess TEA is simulated by reducing IK0dr by 66%. As observed
the distinctive features observed in turtle motoneuron APs,
experimentally in turtle motoneurons, a low concentration
namely a fast AHP associated with spike repolarization and
of TEA eliminates the fast AHP (compare Fig. 2D with Fig.
a delayed, slow AHP governing the return to spike threshold.
1B in Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988). The elimination of the
These two AHPs reﬂect the action of the two potassium fast AHP has a series of consequences that results in the
currents in the soma compartment. The delayed rectiﬁer cur-
lower frequency ﬁring observed in simulated TEA. Speciﬁ-
cally, each spike is wider with an increased Ca 2/ component,
rent, which contributes to AP repolarization, is responsible
for the fast AHP, whereas the slow AHP is mediated by mediated by ICa0N, that allows more calcium to enter the
IK ( Ca ). (To better understand the contributions of the individ-
compartment. The elevated concentration of intracellular
Ca 2/ causes increased activation of IK ( Ca ) and thus a more
substantial slow AHP, leading to decreased frequency in
response to the same amplitude current step. These model
results are also similar to changes in AP proﬁle observed in
response to TEA in rat hypoglossal motoneurons (Viana et
al. 1993b).

TABLE 1. Control values of maximum conductance densities

Maximum
Conductance

Dendrite

Compartment

Soma

Compartment

120
100
14
5

gNa
gK0dr
gCa0N
gK(Ca)
gCa0L

Values are in mS/cm2. The effect of pharmacological agents is simulated
by changing these control conductances in an appropriate manner. The
speciﬁc parameter variations are given in the legends of Figs. 2–9.

0.3
1.1
0.33

In vertebrate motoneurons, the steady-state frequency of
AP ﬁring increases in a piecewise linear fashion in response
to increasing applied current (Baldissera and Gustafsson
1974; Binder et al. 1996; Kernell 1965; Schwindt and Crill
1984). For example, as current levels are increased from
ﬁring threshold, the steady-state frequency increases linearly
with a shallow slope through a primary range until the slope

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF VERTEBRATE MOTONEURONS

3375

abruptly increases to deﬁne a secondary range. Our model
operates only in the primary range of AP frequencies. As
shown in the frequency-current ( f-I) plot in Fig. 2C, except
for a steep initial gradient, the steady-state frequency (solid)
increases essentially linearly from ﬁring threshold. (The
steady-state frequencies attained in the simulations shown
in Fig. 2, A and B, are indicated by the ﬁlled circles). The
voltage trajectories between spikes obtained with the model
display similar behavior as has been noted experimentally
as frequency increases in the primary range (Schwindt and
Calvin 1972). The slope of the voltage rise to spike threshold
remains constant as frequency increases, but the slow AHP
begins at progressively more depolarized levels, leading to
a progressively shorter rise to threshold (compare Fig. 2, A
and B).

Ca 2/-based regenerative responses

Another characteristic of motoneuron AP ﬁring is the ad-
aptation in ﬁring frequency that takes place after an injected
current step. Under normal conditions, the frequency is ob-
served to decrease steadily throughout a current step, with
a fast initial adaptation followed by a slower adaptation that
may continue for several seconds (Kernell and Monster
1982). Our model displays a frequency adaptation over the
ﬁrst few spike intervals after a current step, evidenced by
the steeper slope of the ﬁrst interspike interval f-I curve
shown dashed in Fig. 2C. The exact mechanism for the slow
adaptation observed in motoneurons is not known (Binder
FIG. 3. Calcium-based spikes and plateaus obtained in simulated tetro-
et al. 1996), and in this model we were only able to obtain
dotoxin (TTX) and TEA. A and B: top and middle traces show voltages
a fast, initial adaptation caused by a slow build-up of intra- measured in soma and dendrite compartments, respectively, in response to
cellular calcium during the ﬁrst few spikes following a cur-
applied current pulses (bottom trace). A: Ca 2/ spikes invoked by large
current step (Iapp (cid:129) 55 mA/cm2) under simulated TTX and a low concentra-
rent step that leads to a progressive increase in the slow
tion of TEA (gNa (cid:129) 13 and gK0dr (cid:129) 34 mS/cm2). B: in simulated high-
AHPs.
concentration TEA, Ca 2/-based plateau leading to bistable Ca 2/ spikes
obtained in response to brief depolarizing (Iapp (cid:129) 35 mA/cm2) and hyperpo-
larizing (Iapp (cid:129) 025 mA/cm2) current pulses (gNa (cid:129) 13, gK0dr (cid:129) 10 and
gK(Ca) (cid:129) 0.63 mS/cm2).

The two distinct Ca 2/ conductances identiﬁed in turtle
motoneurons, an N-like and an L-like conductance (Houns- mental results into the kinetic parameters for ICa0N by making
gaard and Mintz 1988), are balanced by outward K/ cur-
its half-activation more depolarized than the half-activation
rents under normal conditions, but in the presence of K/
for INa.
channel blockers, they induce changes in AP proﬁle and can
The model behaviors in simulated low concentration TEA,
namely wider Na/ spikes (Fig. 2D) and, when INa
generate new ﬁring behaviors.
is
In turtle motoneurons, the N-like Ca 2/ current is evident
blocked, Ca 2/-based spikes (Fig. 3A), were sensitive to the
under normal conditions only by the transient inﬂux of Ca 2/ manner in which TEA was simulated. For example, if TEA
was simulated by blocking less IK0dr than in Figs. 2D and
during an AP (Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988). Its contribution
to more complex ﬁring patterns has been determined experi-
3A, then calcium currents could not overcome IK0dr to yield
calcium spikes when the Na/ conductance was reduced. On
mentally in the presence of a low concentration of TEA.
When the Na/ current was blocked by the addition of TTX the other hand, if TEA was simulated by blocking more
in the experimental preparation, the N-like conductance gen-
IK0dr, so that calcium spikes were more easily obtained in
erated Ca 2/-based spikes in response to a depolarizing cur-
the TTX case, the sodium spikes (in low TEA, Fig. 2D)
displayed a signiﬁcant Ca 2/ component, up to tens of milli-
rent step (Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988). In the model, simi-
lar Ca 2/-based spikes are obtained under simulation of both
seconds wide, which was visible as a distinct shoulder on
TTX (INa reduced by (cid:130)90%) and low concentration TEA
the downstroke of the spike.
In turtle motoneurons, when more K/ currents are blocked
(IK0dr reduced by 66%), as shown in Fig. 3A. In the ﬁgure,
a large current step induces Ca 2/-based spikes that are
with a much higher concentration of TEA and the sodium
smaller in amplitude and much wider than normal Na/
current is blocked by TTX, the invoked Ca 2/ spikes ride on
spikes. These Ca 2/-based spikes show a slow, smooth in-
a plateau potential that can be triggered by short-lasting
crease to ﬁring threshold governed by IK ( Ca ) and reﬂecting
excitation and terminated by short-lasting inhibition (Houns-
the removal of intracellular Ca 2/. In the turtle experiments,
gaard and Mintz 1988). In the model, similar behavior is
a much larger current step was necessary to invoke Ca 2/
obtained when high concentration TEA is simulated by re-
spikes than was needed to induce Na/ AP ﬁring. Similarly,
ducing IK0dr by 90% and IK ( Ca ) by 43% (Fig. 3B). The
the Ca 2/ spikes obtained in rat hypoglossal motoneurons motivation for simulating the effects of high concentration
TEA in this manner is addressed in the DISCUSSION in com-
under treatment by TTX and TEA are also high threshold
parison to the unmasking of plateau potentials by the bee
(Viana et al. 1993a). We have incorporated these experi-

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

3376

V. BOOTH, J. RINZEL, AND O. KIEHN

venom apamin. In Fig. 3B, a large current pulse invokes a
dendritic plateau potential as well as Ca 2/ spikes. The pla-
teau potential persists after pulse termination leading to pro-
longed Ca 2/ spiking (compare with Fig. 2C in Hounsgaard
and Mintz 1988). A brief, hyperpolarizing current pulse
terminates the dendritic plateau potential, and the soma volt-
age reﬂects its slow decay.

Bistable ﬁring patterns

In the presence of apamin or 5-HT, motoneurons display
a distinctive pattern of AP ﬁring in response to a depolarizing
current step. In contrast to the normal frequency adaptation
during which the frequency continually decreases over the
current step, in the presence of either of these agents, the
frequency shows an initial decrease over the ﬁrst few spikes
but then accelerates (Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1989). In addi-
tion, an afterdepolarization may maintain AP ﬁring after the
stimulus is removed. This ﬁring behavior is explained by
activation of a plateau potential mediated by an L-like Ca 2/
current. Because the precise action of 5-HT on turtle moto-
neuron ionic conductances is not known, we will ﬁrst de-
scribe the model results under simulated apamin, which is
known to be a relatively selective blocker of a Ca 2/-depen-

dent K/ conductance in motoneurons (Hounsgaard et al.
1988b; Viana et al. 1993b; Zhang and Krnjevic 1987). In
the model, simulating apamin by reducing IK ( Ca ) by (cid:130)40%
(in both the soma and dendrite compartments) unmasks ICa0L
and allows the dendrite to depolarize (Figs. 4 and 5). This is
shown in Fig. 4, A–C, where a current step invokes repetitive
ﬁring that shows a brief frequency adaptation over the ﬁrst
few spikes (top trace). Hundreds of milliseconds after this
initial adaptation, the frequency accelerates in response to
the activation of a plateau potential in the dendrite (middle
trace) (compare with Fig. 2 in Hounsgaard and Kiehn
1989). When the current pulse is terminated, the dendritic
plateau persists, inducing continued steady spiking in the
soma. For larger current steps in Fig. 4, B and C, the onset
of the frequency acceleration occurs earlier, reﬂecting the
voltage dependence of plateau activation. Figure 4, C–F,
displays the voltage dependence of the dendritic plateau ter-
mination. In these simulations, the current is stepped to a
ﬁxed level from successively more hyperpolarized holding
levels. At zero holding current (Fig. 4C), the dendritic pla-
teau persists after the current pulse. With a hyperpolarized
holding current, the dendritic plateau decays after the pulse
causing a decrease in spike frequency and eventual termina-
tion of spiking (Fig. 4D). With more hyperpolarized holding

FIG. 4. Bistable ﬁring patterns obtained in simulated apamin [or serotonin (5-HT)]. A–F: top and middle traces show
voltages measured in soma and dendrite compartments, respectively, in response to applied current pulses (bottom trace).
A–C: voltage dependence of plateau potential activation displayed by its progressively earlier onset in response to current
steps of increasing amplitude (all current traces in C; A: Iapp (cid:129) 18.5; B: Iapp (cid:129) 21; C: Iapp (cid:129) 23 mA/cm2 from zero holding
current). D–F: voltage dependence of plateau termination shown by decay of plateau at hyperpolarized holding currents.
Plateau is invoked by current steps to a ﬁxed level (Iapp (cid:129) 23 mA/cm2) from increasingly hyperpolarized holding currents
(A: 08; B: 010; C: 012 mA/cm2). A–F: soma gK(Ca) (cid:129) 3.136; dendrite gK(Ca) (cid:129) 0.69 mS/cm2.

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF VERTEBRATE MOTONEURONS

3377

FIG. 5. Bistable ﬁring patterns in response to
an injected current ramp obtained in simulated
apamin (or 5-HT). A: voltage response measured
in the soma (top trace) and the dendrite (middle
trace) compartments to injected current
is
ramped up and down (bottom trace, peak Iapp (cid:129) 25
mA/cm2 reached in 4 s). B: instantaneous fre-
quency computed during the ascending ( l ) and de-
scending ( 䊊) phases of the current ramp. Soma
gK(Ca) (cid:129) 3.136; dendrite gK(Ca) (cid:129) 0.69 mS/cm2.

that

currents, the dendritic plateau and somatic spiking decay
more quickly after pulse termination (Fig. 4, E and F).

state and a steady repetitive ﬁring state. In the range of
currents seen on the up ramp between the threshold for ﬁring
With reduced IK ( Ca ), the model displays the full spectrum onset and plateau activation, the model shows another type
of ﬁring behaviors experimentally observed in apamin and
of bistability: two stable modes of ﬁring. The low-frequency
5-HT, including the response to an injected current ramp, mode corresponds to when the dendrite is near its stable
resting state ( l ), and the high-frequency mode corresponds
which is depicted in Fig. 5 (compare with Fig. 5 in Houns-
to when the dendritic plateau is activated ( 䊊). If the current
gaard et al. 1988a). As the current slowly increases in the
ascending phase of the current ramp, AP ﬁring in the soma
is clamped in this range, the bistable ﬁring can be explicitly
commences, driving small amplitude responses in the den-
demonstrated by ﬂipping back and forth between the low-
and high-frequency ﬁring modes with brief depolarizing and
drite. As the average dendritic voltage level increases, a
dendritic plateau potential is activated, causing a jump in
hyperpolarizing current pulses (simulations not shown).
spike frequency. This jump is clearly seen in the instanta-
A feature of 5-HT or apamin modulation of motoneuron
neous frequency-current plot in Fig. 5B during the ascending
ﬁring, in contrast to TEA effects, is that both 5-HT and
apamin induce Ca 2/-dependent plateau behavior but not cal-
phase of the ramp ( l ). Immediately after the jump, the
current is ramped back down. The frequency remains at an
cium spiking under TTX (Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988).
elevated level during the down ramp ( 䊊), and spiking ceases
This is also the case in the model under simulated apamin,
at a level more hyperpolarized than the start of the ascending
as seen in Fig. 6, where TTX is simulated by completely
blocking INa (compare with Fig. 3 in Hounsgaard and Kiehn
ramp. In this simulation, the different types of bistable be-
haviors displayed by the model under simulated apamin or
1989). In this case, ICa0N in the soma cannot overcome the
control strength IK0dr to generate Ca 2/ spiking, and the so-
5-HT can be explored. In a range of currents more negative
than zero, where only spiking on the down ramp is observed, matic voltage mimics the plateau responses generated in
the model shows ‘‘bistability’’ between a steady voltage
the dendrite. This is illustrated in Fig. 6A, which shows

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

3378

V. BOOTH, J. RINZEL, AND O. KIEHN

necessary to invoke the plateau. In this section, we character-
ize the plateau threshold’s dependence on the balances of
IK ( Ca ) and ICa0L in the model. In both the model and experi-
ment, the onset threshold, Ionset, can be estimated by conduct-
ing a series of current step simulations, starting with sub-
threshold step amplitudes and incrementally increasing the
amplitude of successive steps until the plateau is fully acti-
vated, similar to the simulations shown in Fig. 6A. The
smallest current step amplitude that invokes the plateau de-
ﬁnes Ionset. Similarly, the plateau offset threshold, Ioffset, can
be estimated as the least hyperpolarized current level that
allows a plateau, as in the simulations in Fig. 6B. However,
a more precise determination of the plateau thresholds can
be obtained by examining the steady-state current-voltage
(I-V ) relation. A cell displaying plateau potentials necessar-
ily possesses an N-shaped steady-state I-V relation. The pla-
teau onset threshold corresponds to the knee of the curve
that initiates the negative-slope region. The plateau offset
threshold, on the other hand, corresponds to the knee that
terminates the negatively sloped region. The following sec-
tion examines in more detail the correspondence between
the plateau thresholds and the knees of the steady-state I-V
curve in terms of the model and, in addition, investigates
how the cable properties of the model, as determined by the
two compartments, distort the I-V curve and the implications
for voltage-clamp and current-clamp behaviors.

By tracking the plateau thresholds, Ionset and Ioffset, as IK ( Ca )
and ICa0L are varied, we can monitor the emergence of the
plateau potential in response to simulated 5-HT. We con-
sider, ﬁrst, 5-HT only blocking IK ( Ca ). The curves in Fig.
7A show how Ionset and Ioffset change as IK ( Ca ) is decreased in
both the soma and dendrite compartments from 100% (con-
trol values) to 50%, simulating an increasing concentration
of 5-HT. As IK ( Ca ) is decreased from its control values
(100%), the steady-state I-V curve remains monotonic until
IK ( Ca ) is reduced by (cid:130)28%. At this point, the curves repre-
senting the values of Ionset and Ioffset meet at a cusp, indicating
that a very small, N-shaped kink develops in the steady-state
I-V curve, with a small negative slope region that keeps the
knees very close together. As IK ( Ca ) is further reduced, Ionset
and Ioffset move farther apart, depolarizing the plateau state
from the subthreshold state and increasing the current range
over which a plateau is observed. The emerging plateau
becomes discernible under current-clamp conditions when
the voltage displacement of the plateau is sufﬁciently large.
The shaded region denotes the levels of IK ( Ca ) reduction that
allow expression of plateaus showing a voltage displacement
greater than 2 mV. The ﬁlled circles mark Ionset and Ioffset for
the TTX and 5-HT simulation in Fig. 6. Note that in this
case, Ioffset is negative so that the plateau persists at zero
applied holding current, as in Fig. 6A. As IK ( Ca ) decreases
below 60% of its control values, Ionset approaches zero current
values; when Ionset is zero or negative, the plateau spontane-
ously activates with no stimulation, and near-rest voltage
levels can only be obtained with steady hyperpolarizing ap-
plied current. From this ﬁgure, we can determine that when
5-HT is simulated by decreasing IK ( Ca ) only, it must reduce
this conductance by at least 28% to invoke an N-shaped
steady-state relation. It is also clear from this ﬁgure that the
plateau thresholds, Ionset and Ioffset, are sensitive to the level
of K(Ca) conductance and, thereby, the simulated concen-
tration of 5-HT.

FIG. 6. Plateau potentials obtained in simulated TTX and apamin (or
5-HT). A and B: top and middle traces show superimposed voltage trajecto-
ries measured in soma and dendrite compartments, respectively, in response
to several applied current pulses (bottom trace). A: onset of plateau poten-
tial is increasingly delayed as current step amplitude decreases toward
threshold (Iapp (cid:129) 18, 16, 15, 14 mA/cm2 from zero holding current). B:
plateau potential, invoked by current steps to a ﬁxed level (Iapp (cid:129) 20 mA/
cm2), decays when current is stepped down to increasingly hyperpolarized
holding levels (07, 08, 010, 012 mA/cm2). gNa (cid:129) 0; soma gK(Ca) (cid:129) 3.136;
dendrite gK(Ca) (cid:129) 0.69 mS/cm2.

superimposed voltage responses (soma and dendrite com-
partments in the top and middle traces, respectively) to ap-
plied current pulses of increasing amplitude (bottom trace).
For the smallest current pulse, the plateau is not activated;
voltage remains steady at a subthreshold level, and at pulse
termination, the voltage quickly returns to rest. When the
current is stepped just above threshold, plateau activation is
signiﬁcantly delayed, due to the slow increase in voltage
from the subthreshold level, and the plateau persists when
the stimulus is removed. For larger current steps, plateau
onset occurs progressively earlier with the voltage increasing
more quickly from the subthreshold level. This delay in
plateau onset and its sensitivity to current step amplitude
have also been experimentally observed, and a theoretical
explanation is presented in a following section. In the simula-
tions shown in Fig. 6B, the current is stepped to a ﬁxed
level from increasingly more hyperpolarized holding cur-
rents, demonstrating that plateau termination occurs earlier
when the holding current is more hyperpolarized.

Exploration of 5-HT induction of plateau properties

In this section, we explore possible ways 5-HT may induce
plateau properties by modulating multiple conductances. In
particular, we investigate changes in plateau properties ob-
tained in the model under simulated TTX in response to
variation of IK ( Ca ) and compare this behavior to plateaus
obtained when both IK ( Ca ) and ICa0L are varied.

An easily quantiﬁable property of the plateau response,
that can be monitored as parameters are varied, is the plateau
onset threshold, that is, the minimum applied current level

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF VERTEBRATE MOTONEURONS

3379

(as in the shaded region in Fig. 7A), and the ﬁlled circle
denotes the 5-HT simulation in Fig. 6.

By comparing these curves, we can determine how the
plateau onset threshold changes under different combina-
tions of effects of 5-HT. For example, to obtain a plateau
threshold at a ﬁxed current level, say 10 mA/cm2 (thin dotted
vertical line), 5-HT has to decrease IK ( Ca ) (cid:130)40% if it affects
no other conductance. On the other hand, it reveals plateaus
with the same activation threshold by reducing IK ( Ca ) by only
30% if it also increases ICa0L by 10%. Similarly, if 5-HT
increases ICa0L by 30 or 45%, a plateau with the same thresh-
old can be unmasked with even smaller reductions in IK ( Ca ).
We can also compare plateau thresholds if 5-HT reduces
IK ( Ca ) by a ﬁxed amount, say 30% (thin dotted horizontal
line). In this case, the plateau induced by only IK ( Ca ) reduc-
tion has a much higher threshold than the plateau induced
if 5-HT also increases ICa0L by 10%. Finally, the ﬁgure shows
that if 5-HT increases ICa0L by 45%, an observable plateau
is induced with no decrease in IK ( Ca ).

Biophysical determination of plateau thresholds

This section supplements the brief description of the corre-
spondence between the plateau thresholds and the steady-
state I-V curve given in the beginning of the previous section.
In addition, in this section, we investigate how the distortion
of the steady-state I-V curve due to the cable properties of
the model affects behaviors obtained under voltage clamp
and current clamp. We illustrate the relation between the
steady-state I-V curve and the plateau thresholds by consider-
ing the model behavior under simulated TTX and 5-HT
[modeled by reducing K(Ca) conductances by (cid:130)40%, as
in Fig. 6]. The theoretical steady-state IV relation for this
case (control gc (cid:129) 0.1 mS/cm2), is shown by the heavy
curve in Fig. 8A. The relation is N-shaped with multiple
voltage levels for current ﬁxed in a certain range, corre-
sponding to the plateau potential. In addition, the curve also
shows multiple current levels for voltage ﬁxed in some
range. This latter type of distortion of the curve is due to
the cable properties of the model with active currents in the
dendrite compartment that are not controlled by a somatic
voltage clamp (see p. 401–413 in Jack et al. 1983). The
steady-state I-V curve was computed in the model as the
solutions, including both stable (solid portions of the curve)
and unstable (dashed portion) solutions, to the steady-state
cable equation for all values of somatic applied current,
Isoma, using the bifurcation analysis program AUTO (Doedel
1981) (see APPENDIX ).

FIG. 7. Plateau properties in response to proposed effects of 5-HT. A:
curves showing plateau onset thresholds, Ionset, and offset thresholds, Ioffset,
deﬁned as the knees of the steady-state current-voltage (I-V ) curve (see
Fig. 8A), as increasing concentration of 5-HT is simulated by decreasing
the calcium-dependent K/ conductances in the soma and dendrite compart-
ments (TTX simulated by gNa (cid:129) 0 mS/cm2). Shaded region indicates con-
ductance values yielding plateaus with at least 2-mV voltage displacement.
B: curves showing Ionset for 5-HT simulated by reduction of IK(Ca) and
enhancement of L-like Ca 2/ conductance (solid, control gCa0L (cid:129) 0.33; long
dashed, gCa0L (cid:129) 0.363; short dashed, gCa0L (cid:129) 0.429; dotted, gCa0L (cid:129) 0.4785
mS/cm2. TTX simulated by gNa (cid:129) 0 mS/cm2). Portion of curve below x’s
corresponds to shaded region in A. A and B: ﬁlled circles denote Ionset and
Ioffset values for 5-HT simulation in Fig. 6.

To compare plateau properties when 5-HT is simulated
as regulating more than one conductance, we track the cur-
rent value of Ionset as the maximum conductance levels of
IK ( Ca ) and ICa0L are varied. In particular, we consider 5-HT
To understand how ‘‘cable effects’’ distort the I-V rela-
acting to simultaneously block IK ( Ca ) and enhance ICa0L, sim-
tion, Fig. 8A also displays the I-V curves for the model when
the compartments are more tightly coupled (dashed: gc (cid:129)
ulating the recruitment of L-like Ca 2/ channels. The heavy
0.15, dotted: gc (cid:129) 0.2 mS/cm2). These I-V curves are
lines in Fig. 7B show the change in Ionset as IK ( Ca ) is decreased
from 100% (control values) to 50% for increasing levels of N-shaped (that is, showing multiple voltage levels for ﬁxed
current), but there is no cable-effect distortion causing mul-
ICa0L. The solid line shows the location of Ionset when the
L-like calcium conductance is ﬁxed at its control value and
tiple current levels for some ﬁxed voltages. The distortion
is absent when the compartments are very tightly coupled
only K(Ca) conductance is decreased. This curve is the
(dotted curve) because, in this case, the dendrite voltage is
same as in Fig. 7A, but is displayed over a smaller current
essentially equal to the clamped soma voltage and thus active
range. The other curves show the values of Ionset when the
L-like Ca 2/ conductance is increased by 10% (long dashed),
currents in the dendrite compartments are controlled. With
the compartments more loosely coupled (dashed curve), the
30% (short dashed), and 45% (dotted). The ‘‘x’’ on each
curve denotes the level of IK ( Ca ) reduction necessary to in-
distortion to the negative slope region of the curve begins
voke plateaus with voltage displacement of at least 2 mV
to appear.

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

3380

V. BOOTH, J. RINZEL, AND O. KIEHN

FIG. 8:

I-V relations obtained in the model un-
theoretical
der simulated TTX and 5-HT. A:
steady-state I-V curves computed in the model.
Progressive distortion of I-V relation caused by
cable properties of the model shown by comparing
curves for weak control coupling conductance
(solid heavy, gc (cid:129) 0.1) and tighter coupling
strengths (dashed, gc (cid:129) 0.15; dotted, gc (cid:129) 0.2 mS/
cm2). [A–D: TTX and 5-HT simulated by gNa (cid:129)
0, soma gK(Ca) (cid:129) 3.136, and dendrite gK(Ca) (cid:129) 0.69
mS/cm2.] Plateau potential onset and offset
threshold current levels determined by knees of
control I-V curve and denoted as Ionset and Ioffset,
respectively. B: I-V relations computed by a slow,
somatic voltage-clamp ramp for control (heavy,
gc (cid:129) 0.1) and tighter coupling conductances (thin,
gc (cid:129) 0.2 mS/cm2; arrows denote direction of
ramp; Vs ramped from 060 to 040 mV and back
in 2 min). Theoretical steady-state I-V curves
(dashed and dotted) shown for reference. C and
D: somatic current-clamp simulation. D:
time
courses of soma voltage (top trace) and applied
current (bottom trace, peak Iapp (cid:129) 20 mA/cm2
reached in 10 s). C: same trajectory as in D plotted
in the somatic I-V plane. Voltage jumps corre-
sponding to plateau onset and plateau offset occur
as the current is ramped through Ionset (arrow in
D) and Ioffset, respectively.

current are observed at the voltage levels bounding this re-
gion.

The cable-effect distortion seen in the theoretical steady-
state I-V curve is manifested in a different way when the
The correspondence between the plateau thresholds and
I-V curve is determined by a voltage-clamp ramp (Fig. 8B).
the steady-state I-V curve is further illustrated in Fig. 8, C
In the ﬁgure, instead of showing the time courses explicitly,
and D, where the current at the soma is clamped rather than
we plot the current measured in the soma compartment
the voltage (control gc value). In this simulation, the current
(solid) against the somatic voltage while it is slowly ramped
is ramped up from zero, through Ionset and then ramped back
up and down (arrows indicate direction of the voltage ramp)
down past Ioffset. The time courses of the soma voltage and
for the control value of the coupling conductance (heavy
current are shown in Fig. 8D (top and bottom trace, respec-
curve) and with the compartments more tightly coupled (thin
curve, gc (cid:129) 0.2 mS/cm2). The dashed and dotted lines are
tively), whereas the same trajectory is displayed in Fig.
8C in the I-V plane (solid; arrows indicate direction of the
the theoretical steady-state I-V curves (from Fig. 8A) shown
current). As evident in Fig. 8C, the current is ramped sufﬁ-
for reference. In both simulations, the voltage is ramped up
ciently slowly so that the voltage trajectory essentially fol-
from near resting potential, and the current increases along
lows the theoretical steady-state I-V curve (dashed). The
the steady-state curve. With the compartments more tightly
current ramp starts at zero current and resting voltage on the
coupled, the current continues to follow the steady-state
left-most branch of the theoretical I-V curve. As the current
curve, sampling the negative-slope region as the voltage is
increases, the voltage increases along the branch until the
increased. And as the voltage is ramped back down, the
current passes through Ionset. At this point, the plateau is
current retraces the steady-state curve. When the compart-
activated (indicated by the arrow in Fig. 8D) by the voltage
ments are weakly coupled with the control value of the cou-
jumping from the left-most to the right-most branch of the
pling conductance, however, the current does not strictly
theoretical I-V relation. As expected under current-clamp
follow the steady-state curve. When the voltage passes the
conditions, voltages on the distorted negative-slope region
knee at Ionset, instead of sampling the distorted negative-
are not sampled. When the current is ramped back down,
slope region, the current shows a discontinuous drop to the
the voltage remains depolarized until the current passes
depolarized or right-most branch of the steady-state curve.
through Ioffset and the voltage jumps from the right-most to
After the jump, the current tracks along the right-most branch
the left-most branch. From Fig. 8C, it is clear that the
as the voltage is increased further. When the voltage is
plateau thresholds are more precisely deﬁned as the points
ramped back down, the current remains on this branch, past
where the slope of the steady-state I-V curve is zero. The
the point where the current jumped down on the up ramp,
curves in Fig. 7 showing the changes in plateau thresholds
until the knee at Ioffset is reached. At this point, the current
Ionset and Ioffset were computed by tracking these points of
abruptly jumps up to the hyperpolarized or left-most branch,
zero slope, or saddle-node bifurcation points, as the maxi-
again repelled by the negative-slope region. As the voltage mum K(Ca) and L-like Ca 2/ conductance values were
is ramped back down to rest, the current is the same as
measured on the up ramp. In contrast to the theoretical
steady-state I-V curve computed with the model, the I-V
curve determined by voltage-clamp ramp does not show a
negative-slope region but, instead, discontinuous jumps in

varied (see APPENDI X ).
Delays in plateau onset

In this section, we investigate several features of the acti-
vation time course of the plateau potential that have been

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF VERTEBRATE MOTONEURONS

3381

Delay in Plateau Onset ⬀

response to the current step, the voltage quickly moves to
values near the knee at Ionset. The voltage slowly increases
past the knee then rises more quickly to the depolarized
plateau state on the right-most branch of the I-V curve.

thought to reﬂect a slow activation time constant of the
L-like Ca 2/ conductance, perhaps on the order of 100 ms
(Powers 1993; Schwindt and Crill 1984). In both experi-
ments and the model, plateau potentials show signiﬁcant
delays in onset, in some cases lasting (cid:156)1 s, in response to
In dynamical systems theory, the knee in the steady-state
near-threshold current steps. For example, as seen in Fig. 6A,
I-V curve is called a saddle-node bifurcation point of the
both the soma and dendritic voltages linger near subthreshold model’s steady-state solution set. The deceleration of trajec-
tories as they pass near a saddle-node point is a well-known
levels for hundreds of milliseconds before rising to the pla-
teau state. Another feature observed both experimentally and
phenomenon, and classical bifurcation analysis has deter-
mined that the delay in plateau onset caused by the slow
in the model is that the length of the delay is sensitive to
passage near a saddle-node depends on current step ampli-
current step amplitude, with the delay decreasing substan-
tially for small increases in current amplitude.
tude in the following manner
In the model, we obtained delays in plateau onset of appro-
priate durations for a relatively fast time constant ( tm L (cid:129)
40 ms). Furthermore, analysis of the model and of our previ-
ous minimal model indicates that the delays in plateau onset where Iapp is the current step amplitude (see Booth and Rin-
may be observed when the inward current underlying the
zel 1996; Strogatz 1994). From this relation, the sensitivity
plateau activates rapidly, even instantaneously (Booth and
of the delay to current step amplitude is clear. For current
Rinzel 1996). To understand the delays in plateau onset, we
steps very close to Ionset, the delay can be signiﬁcant, but it
consider the soma voltage trajectory during plateau activa-
falls off quickly as the amplitude increases above threshold.
tion in the I-V plane, where current is measured in the soma This relation was determined for an instantaneously activat-
compartment, as shown in Fig. 8A. In response to current
ing inward current underlying the plateau. Simulations with
steps of amplitude less than Ionset, the voltage approaches a
our model have indicated that the ﬁnite activation time of
the L-like Ca 2/ conductance exaggerates the delay in plateau
stable, subthreshold level (cf. Fig. 6A) located on the left-
most branch of the steady-state I-V curve. If, on the other
onset so that it is even greater than predicted by the above
hand, the current is stepped well above Ionset, the voltage
formula. Furthermore, the ﬁnite activation time makes long
quickly approaches the depolarized, plateau level deﬁned on
delays more robust to current step amplitude, so that a sub-
the right-most branch of the steady-state I-V curve for that
stantial delay, on the order of several hundred milliseconds,
current value. However, if the current is stepped to a value may still be observed in response to current steps much
just above Ionset, the voltage moves toward the plateau state
located on the right-most branch of the steady-state I-V
curve, but passes very close to the knee at Ionset. At the knee,
the slope conductance is zero; hence the voltage increases
very slowly in its vicinity.

A ﬁnal feature of plateau activation that is observed exper-
imentally and that is obtained in the model with a relatively
fast activation time constant for ICa0L is the slow rise of the
voltage to the plateau state once plateau activation has been
This slow passage near the knee at Ionset is shown in Fig.
initiated. Simulations investigating the effects of longer acti-
9, which plots the model’s response in the I-V plane to
vation time constants revealed that the slope of the voltage
an applied current step just greater than Ionset (Iapp (cid:129) 15
transition to the plateau depends nonlinearly on the activa-
mA/cm2, compare with trajectory in Fig. 6A). Each dot in
tion time constant, so that it is much shallower than a linear
the ﬁgure corresponds to the voltage and current levels at
dependence would predict. Accordingly, the transition slopes
100-ms time intervals during the simulation. Initially, ap- were surprisingly shallow with activation time constants on
plied current is zero and the voltage is at its rest value located
the order of 100 ms. One aspect of this voltage transition to
on the left-most branch of the steady-state I-V curve. In
the plateau that our model does not account for, however,
is the subtle decrease in the slope of the transition that is
experimentally observed as current step amplitude is de-
creased toward threshold (compare Fig. 6A with Fig. 3A in
Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1989) (see DISCUSSION).

(cid:113)

1

Iapp 0 Ionset

larger than Ionset.

D I S C U S S I O N

Comparison with previous motoneuron models

Previous motoneuron models have concentrated on under-
standing normal ﬁring behavior (see Binder et al. 1996 for
a review) and 5-HT–induced bistable ﬁring patterns (Booth
and Rinzel 1995; Gutman 1991; Lee and Heckman 1996a;
Powers 1993), but the present model is the ﬁrst to address
FIG. 9. Delayed plateau onset in simulated TTX and 5-HT caused by
the systematic development of complex and bistable ﬁring
slow passage near knee of steady-state I-V curve at Ionset. Model response
to applied current step of amplitude just above Ionset (Iapp (cid:129) 15 mA/cm2;
patterns by appropriate simulation of multiple ion channel
see Fig. 6A) plotted in somatic I-V plane under simulated TTX and 5-HT
blockers and neurotransmitters. As part of a larger study of
[gNa (cid:129) 0; soma gK(Ca) (cid:129) 3.136; dendrite gK(Ca) (cid:129) 0.69 mS/cm2]. Theoretical motoneuron ﬁring behavior with a threshold-crossing model,
Powers (1993) obtained maintained ﬁring following a short-
lasting current pulse but never true bistable ﬁring patterns

steady-state I-V curve (solid/dashed) plotted for reference. Each dot de-
notes somatic voltage and membrane current at 100-ms time intervals during
the simulation.

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

3382

V. BOOTH, J. RINZEL, AND O. KIEHN

when parameters were varied from their control values. In-
Our model, in addition, only qualitatively represents the
terestingly, in contrast to our ﬁndings, it was not possible
nonuniform distribution of ionic conductances over soma
in Powers’ (1993) model to induce plateau potentials by
and dendrites by lumping currents into two, not strongly
reducing potassium currents alone. The necessary changes
coupled compartments. Studies with this model and our pre-
were a simultaneous reduction of outward currents and in-
vious, more simpliﬁed model (Booth and Rinzel 1995) have
creases in the time constants for activation of a persistent,
supported the hypothesis that the bistable ﬁring patterns in-
low-threshold calcium conductance and a slow, potassium voked by 5-HT require a nonuniform distribution of ionic
conductances and, speciﬁcally, a segregation of plateau-gen-
conductance. These differences to our model might be ex-
plained by the single compartment structure of Powers’
erating currents from spike-generating currents. As indicated
by Gutman’s (1991) results with an idealized cable model,
model, since in our model the spatial segregation of the soma
preliminary simulations with multicompartmental represen-
and dendrites was an essential parameter determining plateau
tations of the dendrites have shown that bistable ﬁring pat-
development (see How realistic is the model?) (Booth and
terns can be obtained when plateau-generating currents are
Rinzel 1995).
more widely distributed over several compartments rather
than lumped into a single compartment. Furthermore, other
simulations conﬁrm that the spike- and plateau-generating
currents need not be entirely segregated to obtain the bistable
behaviors. In particular, in the present model, when ICa0L is
included in the soma compartment, in similar densities as it
appears in the dendrite compartment, results identical to
those presented here are obtained.

The contribution of dendritic conductances to plateau gen-
eration and the ensuing bistable ﬁring patterns has also been
previously investigated in an equivalent cylinder, cable
model (Gutman 1991) and in two-compartment models
(Booth and Rinzel 1995; Lee and Heckman 1996a). In these
models, plateau-generating currents were not slow and were
localized in the dendrites (cable or compartment, respec-
tively), and the pharmacologically mediated state change
from the normal situation when the plateau is masked to the
plateau-generating state was not addressed. In addition, the Mechanism for plateau generation
ionic conductances responsible for spike and plateau genera-
tion in some of these models were idealized and not biophys-
ically grounded (Booth and Rinzel 1995; Gutman 1991).
We therefore believe that the present model represents a
valuable addition to previously published models of verte-
brate motoneurons by combining a compartmental structure
with nonuniform spatial distribution of biophysically plausi-
ble active conductances.

How realistic is the model?

Although our model might not provide a complete descrip-
tion of vertebrate motoneuron membrane properties, it al-
lowed us to test speciﬁc hypotheses on the effects of pharma-
cological perturbations. For example, experimental results
have suggested that plateau potential behavior may be
evoked by sufﬁcient reduction of various combinations of
outward, potassium currents. Our model simulations of high-
concentration TEA and apamin experiments, however, have
challenged this assumption and, as we will argue, suggest
Although the model displays a variety of behaviors resem-
that the primary currents balancing the plateau-generating
bling experimental results during simulations of different
calcium conductance are calcium-dependent potassium con-
pharmacological conditions, it does not constitute a physio-
ductances. The experimental results in apamin determine
logically complete description of a vertebrate motoneuron.
that a K(Ca) conductance contributes to plateau masking
The types of ionic conductances included in the model are
(Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988). The model results in simu-
biophysically plausible, but, with only limited quantitative
lated apamin conﬁrm that IK ( Ca ) participates in plateau mask-
data available from turtle motoneurons, their distribution
ing. Furthermore, in the model, the inﬂuence of the K(Ca)
between the soma and dendrite compartments and their ki-
conductance on the plateau is very robust: increasing den-
dritic IK ( Ca ) will always mask the plateau, whereas decreasing
netic parameters have been qualitatively determined. How-
ever, the kinetic parameters do not signiﬁcantly differ from it easily unmasks the plateau. In the high TEA experiments,
it was suggested that blocking IK0dr alone may also release
those quantitatively identiﬁed in cat motoneurons (Binder
et al. 1996; Schwindt and Crill 1984). Our model also does
the plateau (Hounsgaard and Mintz 1988). We have used
the model to investigate this possible action of TEA. Our
not include several conductances that have been identiﬁed
in vertebrate motoneurons, such as a hyperpolarization-acti-
simulations have shown that a large level of dendritic IK0dr
vated inward, or ‘‘sag,’’ current (Ih) (Bayliss et al. 1994;
is needed to mask the plateau. Moreover, this necessary
Schwindt and Crill 1984; Takahashi 1990a,b) and an A-
conductance level is sufﬁciently large as to maintain plateau
block even under simulated apamin, when K(Ca) conduc-
type potassium current (IA) (Takahashi 1990b; Viana et al.
1993b). In crustacean and neonatal rat spinal motoneurons,
tances are completely removed. Hence, to obtain all pharma-
cological behaviors,
the high-concentration TEA experi-
Ih is active at resting membrane potentials and is enhanced
by 5-HT (Kiehn and Harris-Warrick 1992a; Takahashi and ments cannot be simulated by only decreasing the delayed
Berger 1990). Given its important role in plateau generation
potassium rectiﬁer. So, in contrast to the real experiments,
in crustacean motoneurons (Kiehn and Harris-Warrick we ﬁnd that both K/ delayed rectiﬁer and K(Ca) conduc-
tances must be decreased. These results also suggest that the
1992a,b), Ih is a natural candidate for inclusion in future
delayed rectiﬁer conductance in the dendrite cannot be large,
models as is a low-threshold, transient calcium current that
because it would impede the plateau in the apamin simula-
is found in neonatal rat motoneurons and that plays a role in
rebound excitation (Berger and Takahashi 1990). Currently,
tions (we have elected to eliminate it entirely). We thus
conclude that in turtle motoneurons the primary outward
very little is known about IA in vertebrate motoneurons (see
Binder et al. 1996; McLarnon 1995), hence it was omitted
currents balancing the plateau-generating calcium conduc-
from the model.
tance are calcium-dependent potassium conductances.

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

The model allowed a thorough investigation of the time
course of plateau activation. The results indicated that al-
though delays in plateau onset are a general feature of plateau
potentials irregardless of the activation gating rate of the
plateau-generating currents, the steepness of the time course
of the voltage transition from subthreshold to plateau states
does depend on the underlying current’s activation rate. This
model result does not, however, completely account for the
experimental behavior of the voltage transition to the pla-
teau. Plateaus in turtle motoneurons show an additional sub-
tle increase in the steepness of the voltage transition as the
current is stepped away from onset threshold, a behavior
that is not observed in the model (compare Fig. 6 with
Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1989, Fig. 3). In turtle dorsal horn
neurons, plateau potentials, mediated by an L-type Ca 2/
conductance, show, in addition to delays in onset and slow
transitions to the plateau state, wind-up in response to pre-
ceding depolarization, suggesting a depolarization-induced
warm-up of the L-type conductance (Russo and Hounsgaard
1996). Warm-up is present in motoneurons as well (Svirskis
and Hounsgaard 1995), and it is likely that the subtle in-
crease in the voltage transition slope observed when the step
amplitude is increased is due to a depolarizing induced
warm-up of the L-like calcium channels, implying that there
are at least two mechanisms contributing to the slope of the
voltage transition.

A P P E N D I X

The current balance equations for the two compartments are

Cm

dVS
dt

(cid:129) 0gNam 3

⬁(VS)h(Vs 0 VNa) 0 gK0drn 4(VS 0 VK)

Investigation of 5-HT modulation

An advantage offered by the simulation of pharmacologi-
cal agents is that the effects on ﬁring patterns of different
concentrations of the agent can be investigated. In the experi-
mental preparation, the time necessary for the effects of an
agent to reach steady state and the difﬁculty in obtaining
precise quantitative measurements of plateau-generating
ability over time prohibit this type of systematic measure-
ment. With the model, however, we are able to monitor
the development of complex behaviors as not only different
concentrations of a pharmacological agent are simulated but
also as different effects of the agent on ionic conductances
are simulated. We particularly examined the development
of plateau properties obtained in TTX as application of
5-HT is simulated. Our comparison of plateau onset thresh-
olds under 5-HT enhancement of the plateau-generating,
L-like calcium conductance and reduction of IK ( Ca ) (Fig. 7B)
illustrate that 5-HT may invoke plateau behavior through
a combination of actions on more than one conductance.
Although the effect on IK ( Ca ) has been demonstrated experi-
mentally (Hounsgaard and Kiehn 1989), there is as yet no
experimental evidence for a 5-HT modulation of ICa0L in
turtle motoneurons.

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF VERTEBRATE MOTONEURONS

3383

cological agents and to formulate future experiments.

Furthermore, proceeding from this conclusion, the phar-
activation is left-shifted by a few millivolts. These types of
macological evidence implies that the K(Ca) currents are
analyses clearly demonstrate that the model can be used as
mediated by ion channels that are sensitive to either TEA a predictive tool to investigate modulatory effects of pharma-
in high concentrations or apamin and 5-HT. An apamin-
sensitive K(Ca) conductance has been identiﬁed in turtle
motoneurons (Hounsgaard et al. 1988b), which corresponds Delay and slope of plateau activation
to the low-conductance SK channel described in other neu-
rons, where it also generates a medium to slow duration
AHP, as in the turtle neuron (see McLarnon 1995). The
model results, then, suggest that turtle motoneurons may
contain two Ca 2/-dependent K/ conductances, one of which
is TEA sensitive. (Note that in the model they are repre-
sented by 1 conductance.) Such a TEA-sensitive K(Ca) con-
ductance has indeed been described in hypoglossal motoneu-
rons where it may contribute to spike repolarization (Viana
et al. 1993b).

Cm

dVD
dt

0gK(Ca)

0gCa0Nm 2

NhN(VS 0 VCa) 0 gK(Ca)

CaS

(VS 0 Vk)

(cid:129) 0gCa0Nm 2

(VD 0 VS) / Iapp

(CaS / Kd)
0gL(VS 0 VL) / gc
p
NhN(VD 0 VCa) 0 gCa0LmL(VD 0 VCa)

In our model, we have simulated the effect of 5-HT as a
direct inhibition of the K(Ca) conductance. It remains a
possibility, as has been demonstrated in hypoglossal moto-
neurons (Bayliss et al. 1995), that 5-HT indirectly reduces
IK ( Ca ) by blocking N-like calcium channels. Although a thor-
ough study of this effect of 5-HT has not been performed,
preliminary simulations with the present ‘‘control case’’ pa-
rameters indicate that this indirect reduction of IK ( Ca ) is not
sufﬁcient to unmask plateau properties. Also, in this study,
we have simulated the 5-HT enhancement of the L-like Ca 2/
current as an increase in its maximum conductance, thereby
implying that 5-HT recruits L-like Ca 2/ channels. Another
where Vx (in mV) is the voltage and Cax (in mM) is the intracellular
Ca 2/ concentration in the soma (x (cid:129) S) and dendrite (x (cid:129) D)
possible action of 5-HT that results in enhancement of ICa0L
compartments. The electronic-like properties between the two com-
is a hyperpolarizing or left shift of the steady-state half-
partments are determined by the coupling conductance, gc, which
activation voltage for the activation gate. Model results simi-
regulates current ﬂow between the compartments and the parameter
lar to those in Fig. 7 but with 5-HT simulated by a left shift
p, which is the ratio of somatic surface area to total cell surface
area; in this study, gc (cid:129) 0.1 mS/cm2 and p (cid:129) 0.1. An applied
of the half-activation of ICa0L by 1 or 2 mV show that plateau
potentials can be obtained with less reduction of IK ( Ca ) than
current, Iapp (in mA/cm2), may be injected into the soma compart-
for the control parameters of ICa0L. Furthermore, the results ment. The Ca 2/-dependent K/ conductance is an instantaneous
function of intracellular Ca 2/ concentration, which is half-saturated
indicate that Ionset is fairly sensitive to the half-activation
at concentration levels of Kd (cid:129) 0.2 mM. To ease the notational
voltage, speciﬁcally, Ionset is much smaller when the half-

0 gL(VD 0 VL) / gc
1 0 p

CaD

(CaD / Kd)

(VD 0 VK)

(VS 0 VD)

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

3384

V. BOOTH, J. RINZEL, AND O. KIEHN

burden, we have not distinguished with symbols the maximal ionic
conductances, although their values differ, in the soma and dendrite
compartments.

The gating kinetics of the ionic conductances are governed by

equations of the following form

(cid:129) w⬁(V ) 0 w

tw

dw
dt

where the steady-state activation and inactivation functions are
given by

w⬁(V ) (cid:129)

1

1 / exp[(V 0 uw)/kw]

where w is h for sodium inactivation, n for K/ delayed rectiﬁer
activation, mN and hN for N-like Ca 2/ activation and inactivation,
respectively, and mL for L-like Ca 2/ activation.
The half-activation and half-inactivation voltages for the gating
functions are (in mV) um (cid:129) 035, uh (cid:129) 055, un (cid:129) 028, umN (cid:129)
030, uhN (cid:129) 045, and umL (cid:129) 040. The activation and inactivation
sensitivities for the gating functions are (in mV) km (cid:129) 07.8, kh (cid:129)
7, kn (cid:129) 015, kmN (cid:129) 05, khN (cid:129) 5, and kmL (cid:129) 07. The activation
and inactivation time constants for the Ca 2/ conductances are given
by the following constants (in ms): tmN (cid:129) 4, thN (cid:129) 40, and
tmL (cid:129) 40. The time constants for sodium inactivation and
K/ delayed rectiﬁer activation are voltage-dependent functions
deﬁned as follows (in ms): th(V ) (cid:129) 30/{exp[(V / 50)/15] /
exp[0(V / 50)/16]} and tn(V ) (cid:129) 7/{exp[(V / 40)/40] /
exp[0(V / 40)/50]}.
Intracellular calcium concentration in the either compartment
(Cax, for x (cid:129) S or D, in mM) depends on the total compartment
Ca 2/ current, ICa, in the following manner

FIG. A1. Dissection of individual ionic currents contributing to genera-
tion of an action potential. Top panel: soma voltage measured during action
potential generated in response to current step Iapp (cid:129) 6 mA/cm2, as in Fig.
2A. Dashed line indicates resting potential. Bottom panel: ionic currents in
soma compartment during action potential [solid, INa; dashed, IK0dr; dot-
dashed, ICa0N; dotted, IK(Ca)], measured as deviations from 0 mA/cm2 (long
dashed).

the AP peak) is due to the large driving potential and not to a rise
in Ca 2/ concentration, which occurs later, driven by ICa0N.

dCax
dt

(cid:129) f [0aICa 0 kCaCax]

The model equations were numerically integrated using a pro-
gram XPP, written by G. B. Ermentrout, which offers a variety of
In the soma compartment, the total Ca 2/ current is mediated by
integration methods and can be run on any UNIX workstation. The
the N-like Ca 2/ conductance, whereas in the dendrite compartment model results in Figs. 2–6 and Fig. A1 were obtained by integrating
the equations with a variable time step Gear method (tolerance (cid:129)
both the N-like and L-like Ca 2/ conductances contribute to the
total Ca 2/ current. The constant f (cid:129) 0.01 is the percent of free to
0.004, maximum time step (cid:129) 0.05 ms). The theoretical steady-
bound Ca 2/ (Helmchen et al. 1996), a (cid:129) 0.009 mol/C/mm con-
state I-V curves shown in Figs. 8 and 9, and the continuous tracking
verts the total Ca 2/ current, ICa, to Ca 2/ concentration and kCa (cid:129) of the plateau thresholds shown in Fig. 7 were computed with the
2 ms01 is the Ca 2/ removal rate.
bifurcation analysis program AUTO (Doedel 1981) through its
The reversal potentials for the ionic currents are VNa (cid:129) 55 mV,
interface with XPP.
VK (cid:129) 080 mV, and VCa (cid:129) 80 mV. The leak conductance density
in each compartment is gL (cid:129) 0.51 mS/cm2, and the leak reversal
potential is VL (cid:129) 060 mV. The membrane capacitance is Cm (cid:129) 1
mF/cm2. Control values of the maximum ionic conductance densi-
ties are given in Table 1, and their modulated values corresponding
to the pharmacological simulations displayed in Figs. 2–9 are
given in the corresponding ﬁgure captions.

Present address of J. Rinzel: Center for Neural Science and Courant
Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, 4 Washington
Place, Room 809, New York, NY 10003. Information on the XPP program
written by G. B. Ermentrout may be obtained at the World Wide Web
site http://www.pitt.edu/(cid:130)phase, and the program itself is available via
anonymous ftp from ftp.math.pitt.edu/pub/bardware.

O. Kiehn acknowledges the support of the Novo Nordic Foundation and

the Danish Medical Research Council.

To better understand the contribution of the different ionic con-
ductances in the generation of an AP, Fig. A1 displays the individ-
ual ionic currents (bottom panel) measured during one of the con-
trol case APs displayed in Fig. 2A (soma voltage shown in top
panel). The fast upstroke of the AP is driven by the sodium current,
INa (solid), whose peak is truncated in the ﬁgure. The spike is
repolarized by inactivation of the Na/ conductance and activation
of the K/ delayed rectiﬁer current, IK0dr (dashed). IK0dr is also
responsible for the fast AHP following the spike, indicated by the
dip in voltage below the resting potential (top panel, dashed line).
The dip in INa after its peak is caused by a decrease in driving
force near the peak of the voltage spike. The slower activating N-
like Ca 2/ current, ICa0N (dotted-dashed), peaks as INa returns to
zero, increasing the width of the AP and activating the Ca 2/-
dependent K/ current, IK(Ca) (dotted). Activation of IK(Ca) occurs
as IK0dr decays, initiating the slow AHP and governing the return
to spike threshold. Note, the brief peak of IK(Ca) (coincident with

Present address and address for reprint requests: V. Booth, Dept. of
Mathematics, New Jersey Institute of Technology, University Heights, New-
ark, NJ 07102-1982.

Received 30 August 1996; accepted in ﬁnal form 2 September 1997.

REFERENCES

BALDISSERA, F. AND GUSTAFSSON, B. Regulation of repetitive ﬁring in
motoneurons by the afterhyperpolarization conductance. Brain Res. 30:
431–434, 1974.

BAYLISS, D. A., UMEMIYA, M., AND BERGER, A. J. Inhibition of N- and P-
type calcium currents and the after-hyperpolarization in rat motoneurons
by serotonin. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 485: 635–647, 1995.

BAYLISS, D. A., VIANA, F., BELLINGHAM, M. C., AND BERGER, A. J. Charac-
teristics and post-natal development of a hyperpolarization-activated in-

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

COMPARTMENTAL MODEL OF VERTEBRATE MOTONEURONS

3385

ward current in rat hypoglossal motoneurons in vitro. J. Neurophysiol.
71: 119–128, 1994.

BERGER, A. J. AND TAKAHASHI, T. Serotonin enhances a low-voltage–acti-
vated calcium current in rat spinal motoneurons. J. Neurosci. 10: 1922–
1928, 1990.

BINDER, M. D., HECKMAN, C. J., AND POWERS, R. K. The physiological
control of motoneuron activity. In: Handbook of Physiology. Exercise:
Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems. Bethesda, MD: Am.
Physiol. Soc., 1996, sect. 12, p. 3–53.

BOOTH, V. AND RINZEL, J. A minimal, compartmental model for a dendritic
origin of bistability of motoneuron ﬁring patterns. J. Comput. Neurosci.
2: 299–312, 1995.

BOOTH, V. AND RINZEL, J. Plateau potentials in bistable motoneurons. In:
Computational Neuroscience: Trends in Research 1995, edited by J. M.
Bower. New York: Academic, 1996, p. 47–52.

BOOTH, V., RINZEL, J., AND KIEHN, O. A compartmental model of bistable
and complex ﬁring patterns of vertebrate motoneurons. Soc. Neurosci.
Abstr. 22: 725.4, 1996.

BURKE, R. E., FYFFE, R.E.W., AND MOSCHOVAKIS, A. K. Electrotonic archi-
tecture of cat gamma motoneurons. J. Neurophysiol. 72: 2302–2316,
1994.

CONWAY, B. A., HULTBORN, H., KIEHN, O., AND MINTZ, I. Plateau potentials
in a-motoneurones induced by intravenous injection of L-DOPA and
clonidine in the spinal cat. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 405: 369–384, 1988.

DOEDEL, E. J. AUTO: a program for the automatic bifurcation analysis of

autonomous systems. Congressus Numerantium 30: 265–284, 1981.

EKEN, T. AND KIEHN, O. Bistable ﬁring properties of soleus motor units in

unrestrained rats. Acta Physiol. Scand. 136: 383–394, 1989.

GUTMAN, A. M. Bistability of dendrites. Int. J. Neural Syst. 1: 291–304,
1991.
HELMCHEN, F., IMOTO, K., AND SAKMANN, B. Ca 2/ buffering and action
potential–evoked Ca 2/ signaling in dendrites of pyramidal neurons. Bio-
phys. J. 70: 1069–1081, 1996.

HOUNSGAARD, J., HULTBORN, H., JESPERSON, B., AND KIEHN, O. Bistability
of a-motoneurones in the decerebrate cat and in the acute spinal cat after
intravenous 5-hydroxytryptophan. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 405: 345–367,
1988a.
HOUNSGAARD, J. AND KIEHN, O. Ca// dependent bistability induced by
serotonin in spinal motoneurons. Exp. Brain Res. 57: 422–425, 1985.

HOUNSGAARD, J. AND KIEHN, O. Serotonin-induced bistability of turtle mo-
toneurones caused by a nifedipine-sensitive calcium plateau potential. J.
Physiol. (Lond.) 414: 265–282, 1989.

HOUNSGAARD, J. AND KIEHN, O. Calcium spikes and calcium plateaux
evoked by differential polarization in dendrites of turtle motoneurones
in vitro. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 468: 245–259, 1993.

HOUNSGAARD, J., KIEHN, O., AND MINTZ, I. Response properties of moto-
neurons in a slice preparation of the turtle spinal cord. J. Physiol. (Lond.)
398: 575–589, 1988b.

HOUNSGAARD, J. AND MINTZ, I. Calcium conductance and ﬁring properties
of spinal motoneurones in the turtle. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 398: 591–603,
1988.

JACK, J.J.B., NOBLE, D., AND TSIEN, R. W. Electric Current Flow in Excit-

able Cells. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1983.

duce plateau properties in a crustacean motor neuron by a dual-conduc-
tance mechanism. J. Neurophysiol. 68: 485–495, 1992a.

KIEHN, O. AND HARRIS-WARRICK, R. M. 5-HT modulation of hyperpolariza-
tion-activated inward current and calcium-dependent outward current in
a crustacean motor neuron. J. Neurophysiol. 68: 496–508, 1992b.

LEE, R. H. AND HECKMAN, C. J. Dendritic plateau potentials and bistable
ﬁring in spinal motoneurons: computer simulation studies. Soc. Neurosci.
Abstr. 22: 725.5, 1996a.

LEE, R. H. AND HECKMAN, C. J. Inﬂuence of voltage-sensitive dendritic
conductances on bistable ﬁring and effective synaptic current in cat spinal
motoneurons in vivo. J. Neurophysiol. 76: 2107–2110, 1996b.

LU¨ SCHER, H. R. AND CLAMANN, H. P. Relation between structure and func-
tion in information transfer in spinal monosynaptic reﬂex. Physiol. Rev.
72: 71–99, 1992.

MCLARNON, J. G. Potassium currents in motoneurones. Prog. Neurobiol.

47: 513–531, 1995.

NITZAN, R., SEGEV, I., AND YAROM, Y. Voltage behavior along the irregular
dendritic structure of morphologically and physiologically characterized
vagal motoneurons in guinea pig. J. Neurophysiol. 63: 333–346, 1990.
PINSKY, P. F. AND RINZEL, J. Intrinsic and network rhythmogenesis in a
reduced Traub model for CA3 neurons. J. Comput. Neurosci. 1: 39–60,
1994.

POWERS, R. K. A variable-threshold motoneuron model that incorporates
time- and voltage-dependent potassium and calcium conductances. J.
Neurophysiol. 70: 246–262, 1993.

RUSSO, R. E. AND HOUNSGAARD, J. Plateau-generating neurones in the dor-
sal horn in an in vitro preparation of the turtle spinal cord. J. Physiol.
(Lond.) 493: 39–54, 1996.

SCHWINDT, P. C. AND CALVIN, W. H. Membrane-potential trajectories be-
tween spikes underlying motoneuron ﬁring rates. J. Neurophysiol. 35:
311–325, 1972.

SCHWINDT, P. C. AND CRILL, W. E. Role of a persistent inward current in
motoneuron bursting during spinal seizures. J. Neurophysiol. 43: 1296–
1318, 1980a.

SCHWINDT, P. C. AND CRILL, W. E. Properties of a persistent inward current
in normal and TEA-injected motoneurons. J. Neurophysiol. 43: 1700–
1724, 1980b.

SCHWINDT, P. C. AND CRILL, W. E. Effects of barium on cat spinal motoneu-

rons studied by voltage clamp. J. Neurophysiol. 44: 827–846, 1980c.

SCHWINDT, P. C. AND CRILL, W. E. Membrane properties of cat spinal moto-
neurons. In: Handbook of the Spinal Cord, edited by R. Davidoff, R.
New York: Dekker, 1984, p. 199–242.

STROGATZ, S. H. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos. New York: Addison-

Wesley, 1994.
SVIRSKIS, G. AND HOUNSGAARD, J. Depolarization-induced facilitation on
1-type Ca 2/ channels underlies slow kinetics of plateau potentials in
turtle motoneurons. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 21: 65, 1995.

TAKAHASHI, T. Membrane currents in visually identiﬁed motoneurones of

neonatal rat spinal cord. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 423: 27–46, 1990a.

TAKAHASHI, T. Inward rectiﬁcation in neonatal rat spinal motoneurones. J.

Physiol. (Lond.) 423: 47–62, 1990b.

TAKAHASHI, T. AND BERGER, A. J. Direct excitation of rat spinal motoneu-

rones by serotonin. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 423: 63–76, 1990.

KERNELL, D. The adaptation and the relation between discharge frequency
and current strength of cat lumbosacral motoneurones stimulated by long-
lasting injected currents. Acta Physiol. Scand. 65: 65–73, 1965.

KERNELL, D. AND MONSTER, A. W. Timecourse and properties of late adap-

TRAUB, R. D. AND LLINAS, F. The spatial distribution of ionic conductances
in normal and axotomized motorneurons. Neuroscience 2: 829–849,
1977.
tation in spinal motoneurones of the cat. Exp. Brain Res. 46: 191–196, UMEMIYA, M. AND BERGER, A. J. Properties and function of low- and high-
voltage-activated Ca 2/ channels in hypoglossal motoneurons. J. Neu-
1982.
rosci. 14: 5652–5660, 1994.

Biol. Cybern. 25: 163–176, 1977.

TRAUB, R. D. Motorneurons of different geometry and the size principle.

KIEHN, O. Electrophysiological effects of 5-HT on vertebrate motoneurones.
In: Aspects of Synaptic Transmission: LTP, Galanin, Opioids, Autonomic
and 5-HT, edited by T. W. Stone. London: Taylor & Francis, 1991a, p.
330–357.

KIEHN, O. Plateau potentials and active integration in the ‘‘ﬁnal common

pathway’’ for motor behavior. Trends Neurosci. 14: 68–73, 1991b.

KIEHN, O., ERDAL, J., EKEN, T., AND BRUHN, T. Selective depletion of
spinal monoamines changes the rat soleus EMG from a tonic to a more
phasic pattern. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 492: 173–184, 1996.

KIEHN, O. AND HARRIS-WARRICK, R. M. Serotonergic stretch receptors in-

VIANA, F., BAYLISS, D. A., AND BERGER, A. J. Calcium conductances and
their role in the ﬁring behavior of neonatal rat hypoglossal motoneurons.
J. Neurophysiol. 69: 2137–2149, 1993a.

VIANA, F., BAYLISS, D. A., AND BERGER, A. J. Multiple potassium conduc-
tances and their role in action potential repolarization and repetitive ﬁring
behavior of neonatal rat hypoglossal motoneurons. J. Neurophysiol. 69:
2150–2163, 1993b.

ZHANG, L. AND KRNJEVIC, K. Apamin depresses selectively the after-hyper-
polarization of cat spinal motoneurones. Neurosci. Lett. 74: 58–62, 1987.

/ 9k22$$de53

J701-6

11-13-97 15:12:41

neupal

LP-Neurophys

