Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 286: H1573–H1589, 2004.
First published December 4, 2003; 10.1152/ajpheart.00794.2003.

A model for human ventricular tissue

K. H. W. J. ten Tusscher,1 D. Noble,2 P. J. Noble,2 and A. V. Panﬁlov1,3
1Department of Theoretical Biology, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands;
and 2University Laboratory of Physiology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PT; and
3Division of Mathematics, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 4HN, United Kingdom

Submitted 9 August 2003; accepted in ﬁnal form 2 December 2003

the fast sodium, L-type calcium,

Ten Tusscher, K. H. W. J., D. Noble, P. J. Noble, and A. V.
Panﬁlov. A model for human ventricular tissue. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol 286: H1573–H1589, 2004. First published December 4,
2003; 10.1152/ajpheart.00794.2003.—The experimental and clinical
possibilities for studying cardiac arrhythmias in human ventricular
myocardium are very limited. Therefore, the use of alternative meth-
ods such as computer simulations is of great importance. In this article
we introduce a mathematical model of the action potential of human
ventricular cells that, while including a high level of electrophysio-
logical detail, is computationally cost-effective enough to be applied
in large-scale spatial simulations for the study of reentrant arrhyth-
mias. The model is based on recent experimental data on most of the
major ionic currents:
transient
outward, rapid and slow delayed rectiﬁer, and inward rectiﬁer cur-
rents. The model includes a basic calcium dynamics, allowing for the
realistic modeling of calcium transients, calcium current inactivation,
and the contraction staircase. We are able to reproduce human
epicardial, endocardial, and M cell action potentials and show that
differences can be explained by differences in the transient outward
and slow delayed rectiﬁer currents. Our model reproduces the exper-
imentally observed data on action potential duration restitution, which
is an important characteristic for reentrant arrhythmias. The conduc-
tion velocity restitution of our model is broader than in other models
and agrees better with available data. Finally, we model the dynamics
of spiral wave rotation in a two-dimensional sheet of human ventric-
ular tissue and show that the spiral wave follows a complex mean-
dering pattern and has a period of 265 ms. We conclude that the
proposed model reproduces a variety of electrophysiological behav-
iors and provides a basis for studies of reentrant arrhythmias in human
ventricular tissue.

reentrant arrhythmias; human ventricular myocytes; restitution prop-
erties; spiral waves; computer simulation

CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS and sudden cardiac death are among the
most common causes of death in the industrialized world.
Despite decades of research their causes are still poorly under-
stood. Theoretical studies into the mechanisms of cardiac
arrhythmias form a well-established area of research. One of
the most important applications of these theoretical studies is
the simulation of the human heart, which is important for a
number of reasons. First, the possibilities for doing experimen-
tal and clinical studies involving human hearts are very limited.
Second, animal hearts used for experimental studies may differ
signiﬁcantly from human hearts [heart size, heart rate, action
potential (AP) shape, duration, and restitution, vulnerability to
arrhythmias, etc.]. Finally, cardiac arrhythmias, especially
those occurring in the ventricles, are three-dimensional phe-
nomena whereas experimental observations are still largely

constrained to surface recordings. Computer simulations of
arrhythmias in the human heart can overcome some of these
problems.

To perform simulation studies of reentrant arrhythmias in
human ventricles we need a mathematical model that on the
one hand reproduces detailed properties of single human ven-
tricular cells, such as the major ionic currents, calcium tran-
sients, and AP duration (APD) restitution (APDR), and impor-
tant properties of wave propagation in human ventricular
tissue, such as conduction velocity (CV) restitution (CVR). On
the other hand, it should be computationally efﬁcient enough to
be applied in the large-scale spatial simulations needed to study
reentrant arrhythmias.

Currently, the only existing model for human ventricular
cells is the Priebe-Beuckelman (PB) model and the reduced
version of this model constructed by Bernus et al. (3, 51). The
PB model is largely based on the phase 2 Luo-Rudy (LR)
model for guinea pig ventricular cells (38). Although the model
incorporates some data on human cardiac cells and success-
fully reproduces basic properties of APs of normal and failing
human ventricular cells, it has several limitations. First, several
major ionic currents are still largely based on animal data, and
second, the APD is 360 ms, which is much longer than the
values typically recorded in tissue experiments (⬃270 ms; Ref.
36). The aim of this work was to formulate a new model for
human ventricular cells that is based on recent experimental
data and that is efﬁcient for large-scale spatial simulations of
reentrant phenomena.

We formulated a model in which most major ionic currents
[fast Na⫹ current (INa), L-type Ca2⫹ current (ICaL), transient
outward current (Ito), rapid delayed rectiﬁer current (IKr), slow
delayed rectiﬁer current (IKs), and inward rectiﬁer K⫹ current
(IK1)] are based on recent experimental data. The model in-
cludes a simple calcium dynamics that reproduces realistic
calcium transients and a positive human contraction staircase
and allows us to realistically model calcium-dominated ICaL
inactivation, while at the same time maintaining a low com-
putational load.

The model ﬁts experimentally measured APDR properties of
human myocardium (42). In addition, the CVR properties of
our model agree better with experimental data—which are
currently only available for dog and guinea pig (6, 19)—than
those of existing ionic models. Both APD and CV restitution
are very important properties for the occurrence and stability of
reentrant arrhythmias (6, 17, 31, 52, 67). Our model is able to
reproduce the different AP shapes corresponding to the endo-,
epi-, and midmyocardial regions of the ventricles and their

Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: K. H. W. J. ten
Tusscher, Utrecht Univ., Dept. of Theoretical Biology, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH
Utrecht, The Netherlands (E-mail: khwjtuss@hotmail.com).

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement”
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

http://www.ajpheart.org

0363-6135/04 $5.00 Copyright © 2004 the American Physiological Society

H1573

H1574

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

different rate dependencies (9, 10, 36). Finally, we model spiral
wave dynamics in a two-dimensional (2D) sheet of human
ventricular tissue and study the dynamics of its rotation, the
ECG manifestation of the spiral wave, and membrane potential
recordings during spiral wave rotation. In conclusion, we
propose a new model for human ventricular tissue that is
feasible for
reentrant
sources of cardiac arrhythmias.

large-scale spatial computations of

MATERIALS AND METHODS

General

The cell membrane is modeled as a capacitor connected in parallel
with variable resistances and batteries representing the different ionic
currents and pumps. The electrophysiological behavior of a single cell
can hence be described with the following differential equation (23)

dV
dt

⫽ ⫺

Iion ⫹ Istim

Cm

(1)

where V is voltage, t is time, Iion is the sum of all transmembrane ionic
currents, Istim is the externally applied stimulus current, and Cm is cell
capacitance per unit surface area.

Similarly, ignoring the discrete character of microscopic cardiac
cell structure, a 2D sheet of cardiac cells can be modeled as a
continuous system with the following partial differential equation (23)

⳵V
⳵t

⫽ ⫺

Iion ⫹ Istim

Cm

⫹

1

␳xSxCm

⳵2V
⳵x2

⫹

1

␳ySyCm

⳵2V
⳵y2

(2)

where ␳x and ␳y are the cellular resistivity in the x and y directions, Sx
and Sy are the surface-to-volume ratio in the x and y directions, and
Iion is the sum of all transmembrane ionic currents given by the
following equation

Iion ⫽ INa ⫹ IK1 ⫹ Ito ⫹ IKr ⫹ IKs ⫹ ICaL ⫹ INaCa ⫹ INaK

⫹ IpCa ⫹ IpK ⫹ IbCa ⫹ IbNa

(3)

where INaCa is Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger current, INaK is Na⫹/K⫹ pump
current, IpCa and IpK are plateau Ca2⫹ and K⫹ currents, and IbCa and
IbK are background Ca2⫹ and K⫹ currents.

Physical units used in our model are as follows:

time (t) in
milliseconds, voltage (V) in millivolts, current densities (IX) in pico-
amperes per picofarad, conductances (GX) in nanosiemens per pico-
farad, and intracellular and extracellular ionic concentrations (Xi, Xo)
in millimoles per liter. The equations for the ionic currents are
speciﬁed in Membrane Currents.

For one-dimensional (1D) computations cell capacitance per unit
surface area is taken as Cm ⫽ 2.0 ␮F/cm2 and surface-to-volume ratio
is set to S ⫽ 0.2 ␮m⫺1, following Bernus et al. (3). To obtain a
maximum planar conduction velocity (CV) of 70 cm/s, the velocity
found for conductance along the ﬁber direction in human myocardium
by Taggart et al. (61), a cellular resistivity ␳ ⫽ 162 ⍀cm was required.
This is comparable to the ␳ ⫽ 180 ⍀cm used by Bernus et al. (3) and
the ␳ ⫽ 181 ⍀cm used by Jongsma and Wilders (29), and it results in
a “diffusion” coefﬁcient D ⫽ 1/(␳SCm) of 0.00154 cm2/ms. Because
in 2D we did not intend to study the effects of anisotropy, we use the
same values for ␳x and ␳y and for Sx and Sy. Parameters of the model
are given in Table 1.

For 1D and 2D computations, the forward Euler method was used
to integrate Eq. 1. A space step of ⌬x ⫽ 0.1–0.2 mm and a time step
of ⌬t ⫽ 0.01–0.02 ms were used. To integrate the Hodgkin-Huxley-
type equations for the gating variables of the various time-dependent
currents (m, h, and j for INa, r and s for Ito, xr1 and xr2 for IKr, xs for
IKs, d, f, and fCa for ICaL, and g for Irel) the Rush and Larsen scheme
(54) was used.

Table 1. Model parameters

Parameter

Deﬁnition

Value

Gas constant
Temperature
Faraday constant
Cell capacitance per unit surface area
Surface-to-volume ratio
Cellular resistivity
Cytoplasmic volume
Sarcoplasmic reticulum volume
Extracellular K⫹ concentration
Extracellular Na⫹ concentration
Extracellular Ca2⫹ concentration
Maximal INa conductance
Maximal IK1 conductance

R
T
F
Cm
S
␳
VC
VSR
KO
NaO
CaO
GNa
GK1
Gto, epi, M Maximal epicardial Ito conductance
Gto, endo
GKr
GKs, epi,

Maximal endocardial Ito conductance
Maximal IKr conductance
Maximal epi- and endocardial IKs

conductance

8.3143 J䡠K⫺1䡠mol⫺1
310 K
96.4867 C/mmol
2 ␮F/cm2
0.2 ␮m⫺1
162 ⍀䡠cm
16,404 ␮m3
1,094 ␮m3
5.4 mM
140 mM
2 mM
14.838 nS/pF
5.405 nS/pF
0.294 nS/pF
0.073 nS/pF
0.096 nS/pF
0.245 nS/pF

endo
GKs, M
pKNa
GCaL
kNaCa
␥
KmCa
KmNai
ksat
␣

PNaK
KmK
KmNa
Gpk
GpCa
KpCa
GbNa
GbCa
Vmaxup
Kup
arel
brel
crel
Vleak
Bufc
Kbufc

Bufsr

Kbufsr

Maximal M cell IKs conductance
Relative IKs permeability to Na⫹
Maximal ICaL conductance
Maximal INaCa
Voltage dependence parameter of INaCa
Cai half-saturation constant for INaCa
Nai half-saturation constant for INaCa
Saturation factor for INaCa
Factor enhancing outward nature of

0.062 nS/pF
0.03
1.75⫺4 cm3䡠␮F⫺1䡠s⫺1
1,000 pA/pF
0.35
1.38 mM
87.5 mM
0.1
2.5

INaCa

Maximal INaK
KO half-saturation constant of INaK
Nai half-saturation constant of INaK
Maximal IpK conductance
Maximal IpCa conductance
Cai half-saturation constant of IpCa
Maximal IbNa conductance
Maximal IbCa conductance
Maximal Iup
Half-saturation constant of Iup
Maximal CaSR-dependent Irel
CaSR half-saturation constant of Irel
Maximal CaSR-independent Irel
Maximal Ileak
Total cytoplasmic buffer concentration
Cai half-saturation constant for

cytoplasmic buffer

1.362 pA/pF
1 mM
40 mM
0.0146 nS/pF
0.025 nS/pF
0.0005 mM
0.00029 nS/pF
0.000592 nS/pF
0.000425 mM/ms
0.00025 mM
16.464 mM/s
0.25 mM
8.232 mM/s
0.00008 ms⫺1
0.15 mM
0.001 mM

Total sarcoplasmic buffer

concentration

CaSR half-saturation constant for

sarcoplasmic buffer

10 mM

0.3 mM

We test the accuracy of our numerical simulations in a cable of
cells by varying both the time and space steps of integration. The
results of these tests are shown in Table 2. From Table 2 it follows
that, with a ⌬x ⫽ 0.2 mm, decreasing ⌬t from 0.02 to 0.0025 ms leads
to a 3.7% increase in CV. Similarly, with ⌬t ⫽ 0.02 ms, decreasing ⌬x
from 0.2 to 0.1 mm leads to a an increase in CV of 4.6%. The changes
in CV occurring for changes in space and time integration steps are
similar to those occurring in other models (see, for example, Ref. 52).
The time and space steps used in most computations are ⌬t ⫽ 0.02 ms
and ⌬x ⫽ 0.2 mm, similar to values used in other studies (3, 6, 52, 69).
Major conclusions of our model were tested for smaller space and
time steps; the results were only slightly different.

Action potential duration (APD) is deﬁned as action potential
duration at 90% repolarization (APD90). Two different protocols were
used to determine APD restitution (APDR). The S1-S2 restitution
protocol, typically used in experiments, consists of 10 S1 stimuli

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

H1575

Table 2. Numerical accuracy of conduction velocity for
different ⌬t and ⌬x

Conduction Velocity, cm/s

Membrane Currents

Fast Na⫹ current: INa. We use the three gates formulation of INa

ﬁrst introduced by Beeler and Reuter (1)

⌬x, cm

⌬t ⫽ 0.0025 ms

⌬t ⫽ 0.005 ms

⌬t ⫽ 0.01 ms

⌬t ⫽ 0.02 ms

INa ⫽ GNam3hj共V ⫺ ENa兲

(4)

0.010
0.015
0.020
0.030
0.040

75.4
74.4
71.9
67.8
63.2

75.0
73.8
71.5
67.4
63.0

74.2
73.0
70.8
66.8
62.6

72.5
71.5
69.3
65.7
61.7

applied at a frequency of 1 Hz and a strength of two times the
threshold value, followed by a S2 extrastimulus delivered at some
diastolic interval (DI) after the AP generated by the last S1 stimulus.
The APDR curve is generated by decreasing DI and plotting APD
generated by the S2 stimulus against DI. The second restitution
protocol is called the dynamic restitution protocol. It was ﬁrst pro-
posed by Koller et al. (32) as being a more relevant determinant of
spiral wave stability than S1-S2 restitution. The protocol consists of a
series of stimuli at a certain cycle length until a steady-state APD is
reached; after that, cycle length is decreased. The APDR curve is
obtained by plotting steady-state APDs against steady-state DIs. CV
restitution (CVR) was simulated in a linear strand of 400 cells by
pacing it at one end at various frequencies and measuring CV in the
middle of the cable.

Spiral waves were initiated in 2D sheets of ventricular tissue with
the S1-S2 protocol. We ﬁrst applied a single S1 stimulus along the
entire length of one side of the tissue, producing a planar wave front
propagating in one direction. When the refractory tail of this wave
crossed the middle of the medium, a second S2 stimulus was applied
in the middle of the medium, parallel to the S1 wave front but only
over three-quarters of the length of the medium. This produces a
second wave front with a free end around which it curls,
thus
producing a spiral wave. Stimulus currents lasted for 2 (S1) and 5 (S2)
ms and were two times diastolic threshold. The trajectory of the spiral
tip was traced with an algorithm suggested by Fenton and Karma (16).
It is based on the idea that the spiral tip is deﬁned as the point where
excitation wave front and repolarization wave back meet. This point
can be found as the intersection point of an isopotential line (in our
case, ⫺35 mV) and the dV/dt ⫽ 0 line.

Electrograms of spiral wave activity were simulated in 2D by
calculating the dipole source density of the membrane potential V in
each element, assuming an inﬁnite volume conductor (50). The
electrogram was recorded with a single electrode located 10 cm above
the center of the sheet of tissue.

All simulations were written in C⫹⫹. Single-cell and cable simu-
lations were run on a PC Intel Pentium III 800-MHz CPU; 2D
simulations were run on 32 500-MHz processors of a SGI Origin 3800
shared-memory machine, using OpenMP for parallellization (Source
code available at http://www-binf.bio.uu.nl/khwjtuss/HVM).

A description of the membrane currents of the model and the
experimental data on which they are based is given in Membrane
Currents. For most currents a comparison is made with the formula-
tions used in existing models for human ventricular myocytes by
Priebe and Beuckelmann (51)—for the rest of the text referred to as
the PB model—and for human atrial myocytes by Courtemanche and
coworkers (8)—for the rest of the text referred to as the CRN model.
For the fast Na2⫹ current a comparison is made to the widely used INa
formulation ﬁrst used in phase 1 of the Luo-Rudy (LR) model (37)
that is used in both the PB and CRN model. The LR INa formulation
is largely based on the INa formulation by Ebihara and Johnson (11),
which is ﬁtted to data from embryonic chicken heart cells to which a
slow inactivation gate j, as ﬁrst proposed by Beeler and Reuter (1),
was added. A detailed listing of all equations can be found in the
APPENDIX.

The steady-state activation curve (m⬁

where m is an activation gate, h is a fast inactivation gate, and j is a
slow inactivation gate. Each of these gates is governed by Hodgkin-
Huxley-type equations for gating variables and characterized by a
steady-state value and a time constant for reaching this steady-state
value, both of which are functions of membrane potential (see APPENDIX).
3 ) is ﬁtted to data on steady-
state activation of wild-type human Na2⫹ channels expressed in
HEK-293 cells from Nagatomo et al. (44). Experimental data were
extrapolated to 37°. Because there is no equivalent to the Q10 values
used to extrapolate time constants to different temperatures, a linear
extrapolation was used based on a comparison of values obtained at
23° and 33°. Note that similar Na⫹ channel activation data were
obtained by others (64, 40, 55). Figure 1A shows the steady-state
activation curve used in our model. For comparison, temperature-
corrected experimental data are added.

The steady-state curve for inactivation (h⬁ ⫻ j⬁) is ﬁtted to
steady-state inactivation data from Nagatomo et al. (44). Again, data
were extrapolated to 37°. Similar inactivation data were obtained by
others (55, 64). Figure 1B shows the steady-state inactivation curve
used in our model together with temperature-corrected experimental
data. Note that for resting membrane potentials the h and j gates are
partially inactivated.

The time constants ␶h and ␶j are derived from current decay
(typically V greater than ⫺50 mV) and current recovery experiments
(typically V less than ⫺80 mV) (40, 44, 55, 58, 63–65). In both types
of experiments a double-exponential ﬁt is made to the data, allowing
interpretation of the fast and slow inactivation time constants as ␶h and
␶j, respectively. To convert all data to 37° a Q10 ⫽ 2.79 (derived from
a comparison of fast inactivation time constants obtained at 23° and
33 by Nagatomo et al.) was used. Figure 1D shows our ﬁt for the fast
inactivation time constants, and Fig. 1E shows our ﬁt for the slow
inactivation time constants of the model. Temperature-adjusted ex-
perimental data points are added for comparison.

Activation time constants are derived from time to peak data from
Nagatomo et al., converted as discussed above to 37°. ␶m can be
calculated from the peak time (where dINa/dt ⫽ 0), assuming that j is
constant and knowing m⬁, h⬁ and ␶h. Figure 1C shows our ﬁt of ␶m
together with experimentally derived, temperature-corrected time con-
stants.

In Fig. 1F the time course of recovery from inactivation for our INa
is shown. Recovery from inactivation was established by applying a
double-pulse protocol: from the holding potential, a 1-s duration pulse
to ⫺20 mV was applied to fully inactivate INa, the voltage was then
stepped back to the holding potential to allow INa to recover for
variable durations, and ﬁnally a second 30-ms pulse to ⫺20 mV was
applied. The INa elicited during the second pulse is normalized
relative to the INa elicited during the ﬁrst pulse to establish the amount
of recovery. Figure 1F shows normalized INa as a function of the
duration of the recovery interval between the two pulses for various
values of the holding potential. Similar to experimental observations
by Viswanathan et al. (63), Nagatomo et al. (44), Schneider et al. (58),
and Makita et al. (40), recovery is slower for higher recovery poten-
tials and has a sigmoid shape when plotted on a logarithmic scale.
Note that in experiments INa recovery is often slower than observed in
our model, because our model is at physiological temperature whereas
most experiments are performed at room temperature.

Figure 1G displays the rate dependence of the INa current. Rate
dependence was tested by applying 500-ms pulses to ⫺10 mV from a
holding potential of ⫺100 mV with different interpulse intervals.
Steady-state current was normalized to the current elicited by the ﬁrst
pulse. The graph shows that for increasing frequency (decreasing

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

H1576

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

interpulse interval) INa decreases and that this decrease is considerably
faster for 21° than for 37°. Experiments performed by Wang et al. (65)
at 32° with an interpulse interval of 20 ms (1.92 Hz) show a reduction
to 0.17 of the original current level, which lies between the reduction
to 0.5 we measure at 37° and the reduction to 0.13 we measure at 21°.
For comparison purposes we also added LR m⬁, h⬁, ␶m, ␶h, and ␶j
curves to Fig. 1, A–E. The following observations can be made. Our
steady-state activation curve lies 8 mV to more negative potentials
(Fig. 1A). Our steady-state inactivation curve lies 12 mV to more
negative potentials (Fig. 1B). Activation time constants are in the
same range of values (Fig. 1C). Our ␶h curve has a similar shape, but
for voltages smaller than ⫺40 mV time constants are a factor of 1.6
larger, resulting in slower recovery dynamics (Fig. 1D). Similarly, our
␶j is a factor of 3–5 larger for voltages smaller than ⫺30 mV, leading
to a considerably slower recovery from inactivation (Fig. 1E). GNa

was ﬁtted to reproduce a V˙ max ⫽ 260 mV/ms, which is in the range of
experimental data found by Drouin et al. (10).

L-type Ca2⫹ current: ICaL. The L-type calcium current is described

by the following equation

ICaL ⫽ GCaLdffCa4

VF 2
RT

Caie2VF/RT ⫺ 0.341Cao

e2VF/RT ⫺ 1

(5)

where d is a voltage-dependent activation gate, f is a voltage-depen-
dent inactivation gate, fCa is an intracellular calcium-dependent inac-
tivation gate, and driving force is modeled with a Goldmann-
Hodgkin-Katz equation.

The steady-state activation d⬁ and steady-state voltage inactivation
curve f⬁ are ﬁtted to ICaL steady-state data from human ventricular
myocytes reported by Benitah et al. (2), Mewes and Ravens (41),
Pelzmann et al. (46),and Magyar et al. (39). Figure 2A shows the
steady-state activation, and Fig. 2B shows the steady-state inactivation
curve of our model together with experimental data from Pelzmann et
al. (46).

Experimental data show that calcium-mediated inactivation is
rapid, increases with calcium concentration, but is never complete (20,
60). More quantitative data about the precise dependence of amount
and speed of inactivation on calcium concentration are unavailable
and hard to obtain because intracellular calcium cannot be clamped to
a constant value. As shown in Fig. 2C our fca⬁ curve has a switchlike
shape, switching from no inactivation to considerable but incomplete
inactivation if calcium concentration exceeds a certain threshold. For
suprathreshold concentrations the amount of inactivation depends
mildly on calcium concentration.

There are hardly any experimental data on activation times of ICaL
in human myocytes. Therefore, as was done in the CRN model, we
used the curve from the phase-2 LR model. Limited data on ICaL
activation times from Pelzmann et al. (46) were used to adjust the
shape of the ␶d curve of the LR model. Figure 2D displays the
voltage-dependent activation time constant of our model.

The time constant ␶fca is derived from experiments performed by
Sun et al. (60). They show that during current decay experiments a
fast and a slow time constant can be distinguished, with the fast time
constant being independent of voltage and depending only on calcium,
allowing interpretation as ␶fca. Sun et al. (60) ﬁnd a time constant of
⬃12 ms at 23°; no data on the concentration dependence of the time

Fig. 1. Steady-state and time constant curves describing the gating of the fast
sodium current. Model curves of our model (cur model) and the Luo-Rudy
(LR) model are shown together with experimental data. A: steady-state acti-
vation curves. Experimental data are from Nagatomo et al. (44) and are
extrapolated to 37°. B: steady-state inactivation curves. Experimental data are
from Nagatomo et al. C: activation time constants. Experimental activation
time constants are derived from time to peak data from Nagatomo et al.
Experimental data are converted to 37° (Q10 ⫽ 2.79). D: fast inactivation
constants. E: slow inactivation constants. Fast and slow experimental inacti-
vation time constants are taken from Nagatomo et al. (44), Schneider et al.
(58), Sakakibara et al. (55), Makita et al. (40), Wan et al. (64), Viswanathan et
al. (63), and Wang et al. (65). Experimental time constants are converted to 37°
(Q10 ⫽ 2.79). F: recovery from inactivation for different recovery potentials.
The time course of recovery from inactivation was established using a
double-pulse protocol: from the holding potential a ﬁrst 1-s duration pulse to
⫺20 mV was applied to fully inactivate INa, then voltage was stepped back to
the holding potential to allow recovery for periods ranging from 1 ms to 5s, and
ﬁnally a second 30-ms pulse to ⫺20 mV was applied to measure the amount
of recovery. INa elicited by the second pulse was normalized to the INa elicited
by the ﬁrst pulse and is shown as a function of recovery time. G: frequency
dependence of INa. From a holding potential of ⫺100 mV, 500-ms pulses to
⫺10 mV are given with interpulse intervals of 10, 20, 50, 100, 250, and 500
ms, corresponding to stimulus frequencies of 1.96, 1.92, 1.82, 1.67, 1.3, and 1
Hz. The steady-state INa obtained for the different frequencies is normalized to
the INa elicited by the ﬁrst pulse. Frequency dependence was determined for
37° and 21°. For the 21° experiments gate dynamics were adapted with a
Q10 ⫽ 2.79.

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

H1577

Pelzmann et al. at physiological temperatures and data obtained by
Benitah et al. at 21°) but were also corrected for the presence of
extracellular Ca2⫹ with a slowing-down correction factor of 2.2 (based
on a comparison of time constants obtained under normal conditions and
under conditions in which extracellular Ca2⫹ was replaced by Sr2⫹
performed by Sun et al.).

In current recovery experiments also,

two time constants are
derived. However, assuming that recovery from calcium inactivation
is fast and given the clear voltage dependence of both fast and slow
recovery time constants, both can be considered as voltage-dependent
time constants. Because our formulation of ICaL incorporates only a
single voltage-dependent inactivation gate, our ␶f is constructed to
form an intermediate between these fast and slow recovery time
constants (⫺40 ⬍ V ⬍ ⫺80 mV). Figure 2E displays the voltage-
dependent inactivation time constant of our model. For comparison,
experimentally found inactivation time constants are added.

For comparison purposes we also added LR phase-2, PB, and CRN
model curves for d⬁, f⬁, fca⬁, ␶d, and ␶f to Fig. 2, A–E. From this the
following observations can be made. Our steady-state activation curve is
similar to the curves used in the LR and CRN model. The PB model has,
for unknown reasons, a curve with a somewhat different shape (Fig. 2A).
Our steady-state inactivation curve inactivates completely, similar to the
curve used in the CRN model, whereas the LR and PB model use
incompletely inactivating curves (Fig. 2B). In experiments, inactivation is
more complete if prepulse duration is longer or temperature is higher (35,
60), implying that inactivation is slow rather than incomplete.

Our fca⬁ curve has a switch shape, with a high level of inactivation
beyond the threshold, whereas the LR, PB, and CRN curves are
gradually declining functions of calcium (Fig. 2C). The high level of
calcium inactivation, together with slow voltage inactivation, causes
calcium to be the dominant mechanism of ICaL inactivation in our
model. This agrees well with experimental data. Incorporating cal-
cium-dominated inactivation in models without local control may
easily result in AP instability: in a local control model (21, 53)—in
which individual ICaL and calcium-induced calcium release (CICR)
channels interact in subspaces—a smaller ICaL current implies fewer
open channels and hence fewer local calcium transients (sparks); the
individual sparks still have the same effectiveness in closing nearby
calcium channels. However, in a nonlocal control model, a smaller
ICaL generates a smaller global calcium transient that might be less
effective in inactivating the ICaL current. By using a switch shape for
fca⬁, we ensure effective calcium inactivation for a wide range of
systolic calcium levels in our model.

The ␶d curve of our model has a similar shape as that used in the
PB model, but with a factor of 2–3 shorter time constants, and is a
minor adaptation of the curves used in the LR and CRN model (Fig.
2D). Our ␶f curve, which is ﬁtted to the experimental data, has a
maximum between ⫺50 and 0 mV, whereas the curves used in the
LR, PB, and CRN models have a minimum in this voltage region, in
strong contrast with the experimental data (Fig. 2E). The f gate
inactivation in our model is much slower than in the LR and PB
model; f gate inactivation in the CRN model is even slower. The slow
f gate inactivation in our model and the CRN model is important for
making calcium the dominant mechanism of ICaL inactivation. The f
gate recovery in our model is similar to that in the LR and PB model
and a factor of 4 faster than in the CRN model. It plays an important
role in determining APDR, which in our model agrees well with
experimental data (see Fig. 8). PCaL is ﬁtted to reproduce peak current
values found by Li et al. (35) under physiological temperatures.

We modeled the driving force of the calcium current with the
Goldmann-Hodgkin-Katz equation. For simplicity, we ignored the
small permeability the channel also has for sodium and potassium
ions. In the Luo-Rudy phase-2 model, a Goldmann-Hodgkin-Katz-
like equation for calcium, sodium, and potassium is used. In the PB
and CRN models, a constant-valued reversal potential is used.

Transient outward current: Ito. For Ito the following formulation is

Fig. 2. Steady-state and time constant curves describing the gating of the
L-type calcium current. Model curves of our model (cur model), the LR model,
the PB model, and the CRN model are shown together with experimental data.
A: steady-state voltage activation curves. Experimental steady-state activation
data are from Pelzmann et al. (46). B: steady-state voltage inactivation curves.
Experimental steady-state inactivation data are from Pelzmann et al. C:
steady-state calcium inactivation curves. D: voltage activation time constants.
Note that the LR and CRN models have the same time constant formulation:
curves are overlapping. E: voltage inactivation time constants. Experimental
inactivation time constants are taken from Beuckelmann et al. (4), Benitah et
al. (2), Mewes et al. (41), Sun et al. (60), Li et al. (35), Pelzmann et al. (46),
and Magyar et al. (39). Experimental data are converted to 37° degrees (Q10 ⫽
2.1). In addition, time constants derived from current decay experiments (V
less than ⫺30 mV) are also corrected for the presence of extracellular calcium
(correction factor 2.2). For an explanation of the latter, see text.

constant is available. We assumed a single time constant of 2 ms to be
reasonable at 37°, comparable to the immediate inactivation used in
the PB model and the 2-ms time constant used in the CRN model.

The time constants ␶f are derived from experiments on calcium current
decay and recovery in human ventricular and atrial myocytes by Beuck-
elmann et al. (4), Benitah et al. (2), Mewes et al. (41), Sun et al. (60), Li
and Nattel (35), Pelzmann et al. (46), and Magyar et al. (39). Sun et al.
(60) show that during current decay experiments the slow inactivation
time constant depends both on voltage and extracellular calcium. After
removal of extracellular calcium, an even slower, purely voltage-depen-
dent inactivation time constant arises. It is this time constant that should
be interpreted as ␶f. Therefore, slow inactivation time constants found in
current decay experiments were not only converted to 37° with a Q10 ⫽
2.1 (based on a comparison of time constants obtained by Li et al. and

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

used

H1578

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

Ito ⫽ Gtors共V ⫺ EK兲

(6)

where r is a voltage-dependent activation gate and s is a voltage-
dependent inactivation gate.

The steady-state activation curve (r⬁) is ﬁtted to data on steady-state
activation of Ito current in human ventricular myocytes of epicardial and
endocardial origin at 35° from Nabauer et al. (43). Because no signiﬁcant
difference between activation in epicardial and endocardial cells was
found, a single formulation was used. Figure 3A shows the steady-state
activation curve used in the model together with experimental data. A
10-mV positive shift was performed on the experimental data to account
for the use of Cd2⫹ to block ICaL current, similar to the approach taken
by Courtemanche et al. (8). The greater steepness of the model curve
relative to the experimental curve was necessary to make sure that no
signiﬁcant reactivation of Ito occurs on repolarization.

The steady-state inactivation curve (s⬁) is ﬁtted to data on steady-
state inactivation from Nabauer et al. Because of signiﬁcant differ-

Fig. 3. Steady-state and time constant curves describing the gating of the
transient outward current. Model curves of our model (cur model), the PB, and
the CRN model are shown together with experimental data. A: steady-state
activation curves. Experimental steady-state data are from Nabauer et al. (43).
A 10-mV positive shift was performed on the experimental curve to account
for the use of Cd2⫹. B: steady-state inactivation curves. Cd2⫹-corrected
experimental data are from Nabauer et al. C: activation time constants.
Experimental activation time constants are derived from time to peak data by
Greenstein et al. (22). D: epicardial inactivation time constants. Experimental
inactivation time constants are from Nabauer et al. and are obtained at
physiological temperatures. E: endocardial inactivation time constant. Exper-
imental data are from Nabauer et al.

ences between curves obtained for epicardial and endocardial cells,
two separate model formulations were used. Figure 3B shows the
steady-state inactivation curves used in the model
together with
Cd2⫹-corrected experimental data.

Inactivation time constants are ﬁtted to data from Nabauer et al.
(43) and Wettwer et al. (68). Current decay experiments show similar
time constants for epicardial and endocardial Ito, whereas current
recovery experiments show much slower recovery from inactivation
for endocardial than epicardial Ito, thus making two separate formu-
lations for ␶s necessary. Figure 3D shows our ﬁts for epicardial ␶s, and
Fig. 3E shows our ﬁt for endocardial ␶s. For comparison, experimental
inactivation time constants are added.

Activation time constants are derived from time to peak data from
expression of hKv4.3–2— encoding an epicardial type transient out-
ward channel—in mouse ﬁbroblast cells by Greenstein et al. (22) in a
manner similar to the derivation of ␶m. Figure 3C shows our ␶r curve
together with experimentally derived time constants.

For comparison purposes we also added PB and CRN model curves
for r⬁, s⬁, ␶r, and ␶s to Fig. 3, A–D. From this the following
observations can be made. The steady-state activation of our model
almost coincides with that of the PB model and has a steeper slope and
more positive half-activation point than that of the CRN model (Fig.
3A). In our model we distinguish epicardial and endocardial steady-
state inactivation, whereas the PB and CRN model only have a single
steady-state inactivation curve. The epicardial steady-state inactiva-
tion of our model lies 15 and 25 mV to more positive potentials than
the curves used in the PB and CRN models, respectively. For the
endocardial steady-state inactivation of our model these numbers are
8 and 18 mV, respectively (Fig. 3B).

The activation time constant of our model results in faster inacti-
vation and slower recovery than that of the PB model, whereas it is a
factor of 2 slower than the CRN model time constant (Fig. 3C).
However, in the CRN model three activation gates are used (r3),
causing net activation to be slower and net deactivation to be faster
than that of a single gate and thus complicating the comparison. In our
model we distinguish epicardial and endocardial inactivation time
constants, whereas the PB and CRN model only have a single
inactivation time constant. The inactivation time constant of the PB
model resembles our epicardial inactivation time constant in magni-
tude but has hardly any voltage dependence. The inactivation time
constant of the CRN model is similar to our epicardial inactivation
time constant (Fig. 3D).

Gto is ﬁtted to experimental data on current density from Wettwer
et al. (68) and Nabauer et al. (43). Both show large differences in Ito
size between epicardial and endocardial cells. We use Gto ⫽ 0.294
nS/pF for epicardial and Gto ⫽ 0.073 nS/pF for endocardial cells (25%
of the value for epicardial cells). Figure 4 shows the current voltage
(I-V) relationships for epicardial (Fig. 4A) and endocardial (Fig. 4B)
Ito together with experimental data from Nabauer et al. (43).

We assume that Ito is speciﬁc for potassium ions and used the
reversal potential EK. A similar approach is taken in the CRN model,
whereas in the PB model it is assumed that the channel is also
permeable to sodium ions.

Slow delayed rectiﬁer current: IKs. For the slow delayed rectiﬁer

current the following formulation is used

IKs ⫽ GKsxs

2共V ⫺ EKs兲

(7)

where xs is an activation gate and EKs is a reversal potential deter-
mined by a large permeability to potassium and a small permeability
to sodium ions (see APPENDIX).

The steady-state activation curve (xs⬁

2 ) is ﬁtted to IKr activation data
obtained for human ventricular myocytes at 36° from Li et al. (34). In
Fig. 5A the steady-state activation curve used in the model is shown
together with the experimental data.

Activation time constants are based on data from Virag et al. (62)
and Wang et al. (66). Both sets of data were obtained in human
ventricular myocytes at physiological temperatures. Figure 5B shows

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

H1579

Fig. 4. A and B: epicardial (A) and endocardial (B) Ito current traces generated by the model during simulated voltage-clamp
experiments. Currents are recorded during 500-ms voltage steps to potentials ranging from ⫺30 to 80 mV from a holding potential
of ⫺80 mV and an intermittent 100-ms prepulse to ⫺60 mV. Note that during simulation both the Ito and IpK currents were switched
on. The sustained part of the current traces is generated by IpK. C: epicardial and endocardial Ito current-voltage (I-V) curves
obtained from the series of experiments shown in A and B, respectively. Peak current minus maintained current was measured.
Experimental I-V curves from Nabauer et al. (43), obtained with a similar voltage-clamp protocol, are added for comparison. The
experimental curves are rescaled by a factor of 1.4. We choose Ito density to be somewhat larger than experimentally found to obtain
a realistic notch in epicardial action potential morphology.

our ﬁt of ␶xs. Experimentally obtained activation time constants are
added for comparison.

Fitting GKs to experimentally obtained current densities would
result in a small IKs that has little effect on APD: simulating M cells
by a 75% reduction in IKs density (the principal difference with
epicardial cells) would result in M cell APD being only 10 ms longer
than epicardial APD, in strong contrast with the 100-ms difference in
APD found experimentally (9, 36). Thus there is a discrepancy
between current density measured in voltage-clamp experiments and
the apparent contribution of the current to APD. This discrepancy is
probably due to sensitivity of IKs channels to the cell
isolation
procedures used for voltage-clamp experiments (70), resulting in
considerable degradation of IKs channels before current density mea-
surements. Therefore, instead of ﬁtting GKs to voltage-clamp data, we
based it on APD measurements: by using a GKs ⫽ 0.327 nS/pF for
epicardial cells and a GKs ⫽ 0.082 nS/pF in M cells, we get an
epicardial APD at 1 Hz of 276 ms and an M cell APD of 336 ms,
resulting in an APD difference of 60 ms, which is in the range of
experimental values (9, 36). This approach of basing a conductance
value on electrophysiological properties rather than measured current
density is also used in the development of other models; e.g., in the
CRN model, GNa is ﬁtted to get the right V˙ max, Gto to get the right AP
morphology, and GKr and GKs to get the right APD (8) and in a later
version of the LR model in which IK was replaced by IKr and IKs, GKs
was ﬁtted to get the right APD prolongation if IKs current is blocked

(71). In addition, the values used for GKs and GKr in the CRN model
and the LR model are similar to the values we use in our model. In
Fig. 5C the I-V relationship of IKs is shown together with rescaled
experimental data from Li et al.

We use a sodium-to-potassium permeability ratio of pKNa ⫽ 0.03,
resulting in a reversal potential EKs that forms a compromise between
reversal potentials found experimentally (34, 62). In the PB model a
permeability ratio of 0.018 is used, whereas in the CRN model it is
assumed that IKs is permeable to potassium ions only. Our steady-state
activation curve lies 5 and 15 mV to more positive potentials than the
curves used in the CRN and PB models, respectively. Compared with
the ␶xs formulations used by both of these models, our IKs displays
slower activation and more rapid deactivation.

Rapid delayed rectiﬁer current: IKr. The rapid delayed rectiﬁer

current is described by the following equation

IKr ⫽ GKr冑Ko

5.4

xr1xr2共V ⫺ EK兲

(8)

where xr1 is an activation gate and xr2 is an inactivation gate. 公Ko/5.4
represents the Ko dependence of the current. Note that because no data
are available on the Ko dependence of human ventricular IKr, a similar
dependence as measured in and implemented for animal myocytes is
assumed (38).

Fig. 5. Steady-state and time constant curves describing the gating of the slow delayed rectiﬁer current. A: steady-state activation
curve. Experimental steady-state data are from Li et al. (34). B: activation time constants. Experimental activation time constants
are from Virag et al. (62) (for voltages ranging from ⫺50 to 0 mV) and Wang et al. (66) (for voltages ranging from ⫺10 to 40
mV) and are obtained at physiological temperatures. C: I-V relationship for IKs. Tail currents are measured during 5,000-ms voltage
steps to potentials ranging from ⫺10 to 50 mV from a holding potential of ⫺40 mV. Experimental I-V curves obtained with a
similar protocol by Li et al. (34) were included for comparison. Experimental data are rescaled by a factor of 12.5. See text for an
explanation of why our model IKs is much larger than the experimentally measured IKs.

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

H1580

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

The steady-state activation curve (xr1

⬁ ) is ﬁtted to activation data on
the expression of HERG channels in HEK 293 cells by Zhou et al.
(72), in Chinese hamster ovary cells by Johnson et al. (28), and in
Xenopus oocytes by Smith and Yellen (59). Steady-state inactivation
⬁ ) is ﬁtted to data from Johnson et al. (28) and Smith and Yellen
(xr2
(59). Figure 6A shows steady-state curves of the model together with
experimental data.

Activation time constants (␶xr1) are ﬁtted to data from Zhou et al.
(72) obtained at physiological temperatures. ␶xr12 is ﬁtted to inacti-
vation time constants obtained at physiological temperatures by John-
son et al. (28). Figure 6B shows our ﬁt of ␶xr1, and Fig. 6C shows our
ﬁt of ␶xr2. Experimentally obtained time constants are added for
comparison.

Fitting GKr to experimentally obtained current densities would
result in an IKr that has a lower contribution to APD than suggested by
experiments in which IKr is blocked (34). Therefore, similar to our
approach for GKs, we used such a value for GKr (0.128 nS/pF) that a
complete blocking of IKr leads to 44 ms of APD prolongation, which
is in the range of values found experimentally by Li et al. (34). The
I-V relationship of IKr is shown in Fig. 6D. For comparison, rescaled
experimental data from Iost et al. (25) and Li et al. (34) are added.
Note that our model curve is shifted toward more negative potentials
relative to the experimental curves. This difference may be due to the
fact that we ﬁtted IKr to data from expression experiments in hamster
and Xenopus cells, whereas the experimental I-V curves are from
experiments on human cardiac cells.

The steady-state activation curve of our IKr lies 10 and 20 mV to
more negative potentials than the curves used in the PB and CRN

models, respectively. ␶xr1 has a size and a shape similar to those used
in these two models. We modeled inward rectiﬁcation as a time-
dependent inactivation gate, whereas the PB and the CRN model
implemented this inactivation as being instantaneous. Our steady-state
inactivation curve lies 50 and 60 mV to more negative potentials than
the inward rectiﬁcation curves used in the PB and CRN models, which
seem to have no clear experimental basis.

Inward rectiﬁer K⫹ current: IK1. For IK1 the following formulation

is used

IK1 ⫽ GK1冑Ko

5.4

xK1⬁共V ⫺ EK兲

(9)

where xK1⬁ is a time-independent inward rectiﬁcation factor that is a
function of voltage. 公Ko/5.4 represents the Ko dependence of the
current. As for IKr, because of a lack of data on Ko dependence of
human IK1 we assumed a dependence similar to that
in animal
myocytes.

Experimental data on IK1 current size are highly variable, as
previously discussed by Courtemanche et al. (8). We used the formu-
lation for IK1 used in the PB model but increased GK1 by a factor of
2 to account for the larger current densities found by Koumi et al. (33)
in the IK1-relevant voltage range (⫺90 mV to ⫺40 mV). This results
in a value for GK1 that is approximately ﬁve times larger than in the
CRN model, which agrees with data from Koumi et al. (33) showing
that IK1 is a factor of 5.6 higher in human ventricular than in atrial
myocytes.

Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger current, Na⫹/K⫹ pump current, and plateau
and background currents. For INaCa the following equation is used

INaCa ⫽ kNaCa

e␥VF/RTNai

3Cao ⫺ e共␥⫺1兲VF/RTNao

3Cai␣

共KmNai

3 ⫹ Nao

3兲共KmCa ⫹ Cao兲共1 ⫹ ksate共␥⫺1兲VF/RT兲

(10)

This formulation is similar to the equation used in the LR model,
except for the extra factor ␣ (⫽ 2.5) that accounts for the higher
concentration of calcium in the subspace close to the sarcolemmal
membrane where the Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger is actually operating. Our
approach is similar to that used in the Noble et al. model with diadic
subspace (45), where INaCa was made dependent on diadic calcium
rather than bulk cytoplasmic calcium. Otherwise, during the AP
plateau phase the increase in bulk cytoplasmic calcium is not enough
to counteract the increase in voltage and INaCa current becomes
outward oriented during a long period of the plateau phase, which is
unrealistic (27).

For INaK we use the following formulation

INaK

⫽ RNaK

KoNai

共Ko ⫹ KmK兲共Nai ⫹ KmNa兲共1 ⫹ 0.1245e⫺0.1VF/RT ⫹ 0.0353e⫺VF/RT兲
(11)

This formulation is similar to the formulations used in the LR, PB,

and CRN models.

For IpCa the following commonly applied equation is used

Fig. 6. Steady-state and time constant curves describing the gating of the rapid
delayed rectiﬁer current. A: steady-state activation and inactivation curves.
Experimental data on steady-state activation are from Zhou et al. (72),
experimental data on inactivation are from Johnson et al. (28) and Smith and
Yellen (59). B: activation time constants. Experimental activation time con-
stants are from Zhou et al. (72). C: inactivation time constants. Experimental
inactivation time constants are from Johnson et al. (28). Experimental time
constants are obtained at physiological temperatures. D: I-V relationship for
IKr. Tail currents are measured during 3,000-ms voltage steps to potentials
ranging from ⫺40 to 60 mV from a holding potential of ⫺60 mV. For
comparison experimental I-V curves obtained using a similar protocol by Iost
et al. (25) (exper 1) and Li et al. (34) (exper 2) are added. Experimental curves
are rescaled by factors of 2.4 and 1.4, respectively. See text for an explanation
of why our model IKr is larger than the experimentally measured IKr.

IpCa ⫽ GpCa

Cai

KpCa ⫹ Cai

For IpK the following equation is used

IpK ⫽ GpK

V ⫺ EK

1 ⫹ e共25⫺V兲/5.98

(12)

(13)

This is similar to the equation used by Luo and Rudy.
The background sodium and calcium leakage currents are given by

the following equations

IbNa ⫽ GbNa共V ⫺ ENa兲

(14)

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

H1581

IbCa ⫽ GbCa共V ⫺ ECa兲

(15)

For PNaCa, PNaK, GpCa, GpK, GbNa, and GbCa, values were chosen
such that a frequency change results in Nai, Ki, and Cai transients with
a time scale of ⬃10 min, similar to experimental recordings (5) and
which result in equilibrium concentrations—for different frequen-
cies—that lie in the range of experimental observations (49). The
values used lie in the range of values used in the PB and CRN models
(for parameter values see Table 1).

Intracellular ion dynamics. The calcium dynamics of our model are

described using the following set of equations
Ileak ⫽ Vleak共Casr ⫺ Cai兲

that transient time scales and equilibrium concentrations lie in the
range of experimental observations.

RESULTS

Single Cell

Figure 7 shows an AP, a calcium transient, and the major
ionic currents generated by the model under 1-Hz pacing for a
parameter setting corresponding to a human epicardial ventric-
ular cell. The AP shows the characteristic spike notch dome

Iup ⫽

Irel ⫽冉arel

2
2 /Cai

⫹ crel冊dg

Vmaxup
1 ⫹ Kup
2
Casr

2 ⫹ Casr
2
brel

Caibufc ⫽

Cai ⫻ Bufc
Cai ⫹ Kbufc
ICaL ⫹ IbCa ⫹ IpCa ⫺ 2INaCa

2VCF

dCaitotal

dt

⫽ ⫺

⫹ Ileak ⫺ Iup ⫹ Irel

(20)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

Casrbufsr ⫽

Casr ⫻ Bufsr
Casr ⫹ Kbufsr

dCasrtotal

dt

⫽

VC
VSR

共⫺Ileak ⫹ Iup ⫺ Irel兲

(21)

(22)

where Ileak is a leakage current from the sarcoplasmic reticulum to the
cytoplasm, Iup is a pump current taking up calcium in the SR, Irel is the
calcium-induced calcium release (CICR) current, d is the activation
gate of ICaL, here reused as the activation gate of Irel, following a
similar approach as in Chudin et al. (7), and g is the calcium-
dependent inactivation gate of Irel. Caitotal is the total calcium in the
cytoplasm, it consists of Caibufc, the buffered calcium in the cyto-
plasm, and Cai, the free calcium in the cytoplasm. Similarly, Casrtotal
is the total calcium in the SR, it consists of Casrbufsr, the buffered
calcium in the SR, and Casr, the free calcium in the SR. Ratios
between free and buffered calcium are analytically computed assum-
ing a steady-state for the buffering reaction (Eqs. 19 and 21), follow-
ing the same approach as ﬁrst used by Zeng et al. (71) (for a
description and values of the parameters see Table 1). Our model for
calcium dynamics has a complexity similar to that of most of the
current models that are used to study the dynamics of wave propaga-
tion in cardiac tissue (LR, CRN, and PB models). Recently, complex
models for intracellular calcium handling have been developed that
model individual L-type calcium and ryanodine channels, discrete
calcium release subunits, and sparks (53, 21). Because of their huge
computational demands these models for calcium dynamics have not
yet been incorporated in models for cardiac wave propagation.

The changes in the intracellular sodium (Nai) and potassium (Ki)

concentrations are governed by the following equations

⫽ ⫺

INa ⫹ IbNa ⫹ 3INaK ⫹ 3INaCa

dNai
dt
IK1 ⫹ Ito ⫹ IKr ⫹ IKs ⫺ 2INaK ⫹ IpK ⫹ Istim ⫺ Iax

VCF

VCF

(23)

(24)

dKi
dt

⫽ ⫺

To avoid the model being overdetermined, as is the case for a lot
of second-generation electrophysiological models (13, 14, 24), we
followed the approach suggested by Hund et al. (24) and accounted
for the external stimulus current (Istim) and the axial current ﬂow (Iax)
in the equation for Ki dynamics. As mentioned above, conductances
of background leakage, plateau, and pump currents were chosen such

Fig. 7. Steady-state action potential, calcium transient, and major ionic cur-
rents under 1-Hz pacing. A: action potential. B: calcium transient. C: fast
sodium current (note the difference in time scale used here). D: transient
outward current. E: rapid delayed rectiﬁer current. F: slow delayed rectiﬁer
current. G: L-type calcium current. H: inward rectiﬁer current.

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

H1582

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

concentrations for different frequencies are in the range of
values measured by Pieske et al. (49). Figure 9C shows the
normalized systolic calcium level as a function of pacing
frequency. Assuming that generated force is linearly dependent
on systolic calcium, the calcium frequency staircase of our
model is similar to the force-frequency relationship obtained
experimentally for human myocardial cells by Pieske et al. (48,
49) and Schmidt et al. (57).

Different Cell Types

Fig. 8. Action potential duration (APD) restitution curve obtained by using the
S1-S2 protocol with a basic cycle length of 1,000 ms. For comparison,
experimental data from Morgan et al. (42) are included. DI, diastolic interval.

architecture found for epicardial cells. Resting potential is
⫺87.3 mV, maximum plateau potential
is 21.7 mV, and
V˙ max ⫽ 288 mV/ms, all in agreement with experimental data
(10, 36). The calcium transient shows the characteristic round-
ed-off triangular shape found in experiments. Diastolic calcium
level is 0.07 ␮M and maximum systolic calcium level under
1-Hz pacing is 1.0 ␮M, comparable to values in the PB model
and experimentally obtained values by Beuckelmann et al.
(26). The ionic currents presented in Fig. 7 have shapes and
values similar to those recorded experimentally. Note that the
initial spikelike increase of IKr in our model is absent in the PB
and CRN models. This initial increase is also observed in
experiments (18, 72) and is achieved by modeling the inward
rectiﬁcation as a time-dependent process.

Figure 8 shows the APDR curve for a single epicardial cell
obtained with the S1-S2 restitution protocol (see MATERIALS AND
METHODS) with a basic cycle length (BCL) of 1,000 ms. For
comparison, experimental data found by Morgan and cowork-
ers (42) are added. It can be seen that the APDR curve of our
model in a wide range closely matches the experimentally
measured curve.

Figure 9A shows the change in diastolic and systolic calcium
levels when pacing frequency is increased in a stepwise fashion
from 0.25 to 0.5 to 1 to 1.5 to 2 to 2.5 to 3 Hz. From the ﬁgure
it can be seen that systolic calcium level ﬁrst increases sub-
stantially up to a frequency of 2 Hz, saturates, and than starts
to decrease. In Fig. 9B the corresponding increase in intracel-
lular sodium levels with increasing pacing frequency are
shown. It can be seen that sodium keeps increasing but the
speed of increase decreases for higher frequencies. Sodium

The parameter setting in Single Cell reproduces the AP of an
epicardial cell. By changing a few parameters, our model is
capable of reproducing the AP shapes of the two other ven-
tricular cell types: endocardial and M cells.

In our model endocardial cells differ from epicardial cells in
their lower Ito density (Gto ⫽0.073 nS/pF instead of 0.294
nS/pF, factor 4 difference) and in their slower recovery from
inactivation (different ␶s, see APPENDIX). These differences are
based on data from Nabauer et al. (43) and Wettwer et al. (68).
According to Pereon et al. (47), IKs of epicardial and endocar-
dial cells are similar. In our model, M cells differ from
epicardial and endocardial cells by having an IKs density of
0.062 instead of 0.245 nS/pF (factor 4 difference). This is
based on data from Pereon et al. (47). M cells have Ito density
and dynamics similar to those of epicardial cells (36).

Figure 10 shows APs recorded under steady-state conditions
at BCLs of 1,000, 2,000 and 5,000 ms for epicardial (Fig. 10A),
endocardial (Fig. 10B), and M (Fig. 10C) cells. From a com-
parison of Fig. 10, A and B, it follows that the smaller Ito of
endocardial cells results in the virtual absence of the notch that
is clearly present in the APs of epicardial and M cells. From a
comparison of Fig. 10, A and C, it follows that the smaller IKs
of M cells results in a longer APD relative to epicardial and
endocardial cells (336 ms in M cells vs. 276 ms in epicardial
and 282 ms in endocardial cells for BCL ⫽ 1,000 ms) and in
a stronger rate dependence of M cell APD.

Note that simulated APD and rate dependence differences
between M cells and epi- and endocardial cells are a bit smaller
than the experimentally observed differences (9, 36). This is
probably due to the fact that M cells differ from the other cell
types not only in their IKs density but also with respect to other
current densities. Currently, differences in the late component
of INa have been described for guinea pig (56) and canine
myocardium (73), with guinea pig M cells having a smaller and
canine M cells having a larger INalate than the other cell types,
and differences in the density of INaCa have been described for
canine myocardium (74), with M cells having a larger ex-

Fig. 9. Changes in calcium dynamics under
increasing pacing frequencies. Pacing fre-
quency is varied from 0.25 to 3 Hz; each
frequency is maintained for 10 min. A: pos-
itive contraction staircase: increase in cal-
cium transient amplitude when pacing fre-
quency is increased from 0.25 to 0.5 to 1 to
1.5 to 2 to 2.5 Hz. For the transition from 2.5
to 3 Hz, a mild decrease of systolic calcium
level occurs. B: concurrent increase in intra-
cellular sodium when pacing frequency is
increased. C: normalized systolic calcium as
a function of pacing frequency. Normaliza-
tion relative to level at 0.25 Hz.

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

Spiral Waves

H1583

The 2D simulations were performed on a 600 ⫻ 600 square
lattice of epicardial ventricular cells with ⌬x ⫽ 200 ␮m. Spiral
waves were initiated with the S1-S2 stimulation protocol de-
scribed in MATERIALS AND METHODS. The results of these com-
putations are shown in Fig. 12. Figure 12A shows a typical
spiral wave pattern after an initial period of spiral formation
and stabilization (at 1.38 s after the S2 stimulus). The average
period of the spiral wave is 264.71 ⫾ 10.49 ms, with an
average APD of 217.36 ⫾ 9.19 ms and an average diastolic
interval of 47.21 ⫾ 6.13 ms. The spiral wave meanders with a
typical tip trajectory shown in Fig. 12B; the size of the core is
⬃3 cm; the rotation type is similar to the “Z” core (see Fig.
12C) described by Fast et al. (15) and Eﬁmov et al. (12), which
combines regions of fast rotation of the tip (see Fig. 12C,
A-B-C and D-E-F), typical of a circular core, with regions of
laminar motion (see Fig. 12C, C-D) typical of a linear core.

Figure 13A shows an ECG recorded during spiral wave
rotation. The ECG is similar to ECGs recorded during ventric-
ular tachycardia. Figure 13, B and C, show recordings of
membrane voltage in a point far away from the spiral core (star
in Fig. 12A) and close to the spiral core (circle in Fig. 12B),
respectively. Note the regular AP pattern in the point far from
the core and the irregular pattern recorded close to the spiral
core.

Similar results were obtained for simulations of sheets of
endocardial and M cells. Wave patterns, tip trajectories, and
ECG and membrane potential recordings were very similar
(data not shown), the only real difference being the period of
spiral wave rotation, which is 264.23 ⫾ 10.37 ms for endocar-
dial and 285.60 ⫾ 6.70 ms for M cell tissue.

DISCUSSION

In this paper we propose a model for human ventricular
tissue. An important feature of our model is that all major ionic
currents are ﬁtted to recent data on human ventricular myo-
cytes and expression experiments of human cardiac channels.
This results in several important differences between our and
previous models, the most important of which are the follow-

Fig. 11. Model conduction velocity restitution (CVR) curves for both the
current model and the PB model obtained by pacing 1 end of a cable of a length
of 400 cells with the dynamic restitution protocol. For comparison, experi-
mental guinea pig CVR data measured by Girouard et al. (19) are added. The
experimental data are rescaled by a factor of 0.92 to get the same maximum
CV level as measured in human tissue.

Fig. 10. Different behavior of epicardial, endocardial, and midmyocardial cell
types. Steady-state action potentials for BCL of 1,000, 2,000, and 5,000 ms for
epicardial (A), endocardial (B), and M (C) cells. D: APD restitution curves of
the 3 cell types obtained with the dynamic restitution protocol.

changer current. Because of the partially contradictory nature
of the data and the lack of data for human myocardium, we
decided not to incorporate any of these other differences in our
M cell description in the current version of our model.

Figure 10D shows restitution curves for epicardial, endocar-
dial, and M cells obtained with the dynamic restitution proto-
col. Again, the longer APD and stronger rate dependence of M
cells can be observed. In addition, we can see that the APD of
endocardial cells is slightly longer than that of epicardial cells,
because of the lower Ito density, and their APD rate depen-
dence is slightly different, because of the slower Ito recovery
dynamics. Results are very similar to experimentally obtained
restitution curves by Drouin et al. (10).

1D Propagation

Figure 11 shows CV restitution curves for a cable of 400
cells. We plotted results for our model and for the PB model,
which uses the LR formulation of INa dynamics. For compar-
ison, we also added experimental CV data. Because no exper-
imental data on human CVR are available, guinea pig CV data
measured by Giruoard et al. (19) were used. It can be seen that
the CVR of our model agrees much better with experimental
data; it declines less steeply and over a much broader range of
diastolic intervals than is the case with the LR INa formulation.
Essential for the shape of the CVR curve is the recovery of
INa, which is mainly determined by the recovery time constant
of the slow inactivation gate j. Slowing down the dynamics of
the j gate in the LR INa formulation makes CVR less steep and
similar to that of our model (6). Note, however, that our CVR
curve was not obtained by rescaling of a time constant but is
based on our ␶j formulation, which ﬁts experimental data on
human INa.

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

H1584

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

Fig. 12. A: spiral wave pattern. The star denotes
a measurement electrode at position (100,100),
and the circle denotes a measurement electrode
at position (200,375). B: spiral tip trajectory
during 1 s of rotation 8 s after the S2 stimulus.
C: tip trajectory for a single full rotation show-
ing “Z”-type core.

ing: slower recovery dynamics of the fast sodium current,
leading to a more gradual CVR that agrees better with available
experimental data; differentiated formulations for epicardial
and endocardial transient outward current, allowing the mod-
eling of these different cell types; and an L-type calcium
current with a fast, dominant, and stable calcium inactivation
and slow voltage inactivation dynamics. In Table 3 the most
important differences between the major ionic currents in our
model and the LR, PB, and CRN models are summarized
together with their electrophysiological consequences. In ad-
dition, conductance parameters used for these currents in our
model and the other models are compared.

Our model reproduces three different cell types: endocardial,
epicardial, and M cells with different characteristic action
potential morphologies and rate dependencies. The APDR of

Fig. 13. A: ECG recorded during the spiral wave activity shown in Fig. 12A.
B and C: membrane potential (V) recorded at point (100,100) (B) and point
(200,375) (C) during 7 s after the application of S1. Point (100,100) corre-
sponds to the star, and point (200,375) corresponds to the circle in Fig. 12A.

our model closely matches experimentally obtained APDR
curves. In addition, the CVR of our model resembles experi-
mentally obtained CVR curves, which are currently only avail-
able for animal cardiac tissue, much closer than CVR curves
generated with models using the Luo-Rudy INa formulation.
Both APDR and CVR are very important determinants for the
stability of reentrant arrhythmias. Our calcium dynamics for-
mulation is of a complexity comparable to that of the LR, PB,
and CRN models and allows us to simulate a realistic calcium
transient and a typical positive human contraction staircase.

The feasibility of spatial simulations is demonstrated with a
simulation of a reentrant spiral wave in a 2D sheet of epicardial
tissue. The period of spiral wave rotation is 254 ms, vs. 304 ms
in the reduced PB model (3), because of the shorter APD in our
model. The spiral wave tip trajectory is somewhat different
from the linear tip trajectory found by Bernus et al. (3), because
of the larger horizontal parts of the Z-type core. Another
difference is that in the model by Bernus et al. (3) the core
pattern has a cross section of ⬃5 cm, whereas in our model the
core pattern has a cross section of ⬃3 cm, again because of the
shorter APD in our model.

Limitations

A limitation of our model is that differences in APD and rate
dependence between M cells and epicardial and endocardial
cells in our model are smaller than the experimentally observed
differences. This is because of the limited current knowledge
of basic electrophysiological differences between M cells and
the other cell types causing these differences. If these differ-
ences are further characterized, they can be easily incorporated
in our model in terms of different current densities and/or
dynamics for M cells, similar to what already has been done for
IKs density differences.

We put considerable effort in obtaining, evaluating, rescal-
ing to physiological conditions, and ﬁtting of experimental data
to get a model closely resembling true human ventricular cells.
However, limitations are unavoidable because of the limited
availability of data, the extensive variability among experimen-
tal data, the considerable variation in experimental conditions,
and the potentially deleterious effects of cell isolation proce-
dures used in voltage-clamp experiments.

There were no data available on ICaL activation time con-
stants, so formulations from another model based on animal
experiments had to be used. The precise nature of calcium-
mediated inactivation of the L-type calcium current is un-
known. We used a simple description with a constant-valued
time constant and a dependence on intracellular calcium only,

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

Table 3. Summary of most important differences in major currents between our model and original LR phase 2, PB, and
CRN models and electrophysiological properties for which they are relevant

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

H1585

Current

INa

GNa
ICaL

GCaL
Ito

Gto
IKs

GKs
IKr

GKr

Our Model

LR Model

PB Model

CRN Model

Slow ␶j recovery from inactivation
More gradual CV restitution
14.838 nS/pF
Typical ␶f shape
Slow f gate inactivation
Switchlike fCa, large calcium inactivation
Calcium-dominated inactivation
GHK current model
1.75⫺4 cm3䡠␮F⫺1䡠s⫺1
Different Gto and recovery from

inactivation dynamics for epicardial and
endocardial cells

0.294 nS/pF (epi), 0.073 nS/pF (endo)
Slower activation and faster inactivation

0.245 nS/pF (epi/endo), 0.062 nS/pF (M cell)
Time-dependent inactivation gate
Initial peak of current during AP
0.096 nS/pF

Faster ␶j recovery from inactivation
Steep CV restitution
16 nS/pF
Atypical ␶f shape
Fast f gate inactivation
fCa gradually declining
Voltage-dominated inactivation
GHK current model
5.4⫺4 cm3䡠␮F⫺1䡠s⫺1
No Ito current

Same as in LR model

Same as in LR model

16 nS/pF
Similar to LR model

Linear current model
0.064 nS/pF
Only epicardial Ito

7.8 nS/pF
Atypical ␶f shape
Slow f gate inactivation
fCa gradually declining
Calcium-dominated inactivation
Linear current model
0.1238 nS/pF
Only epicardial Ito

No IKs current

No IKr current

0.3 nS/pF
Faster activation and slower

0.1652 nS/pF
Similar to PB model

inactivation

0.02 nS/pF
Immediate inactivation gate
No initial peak
0.015 nS/pF

0.129 nS/pF
Similar to PB model

0.0294 nS/pF

LR, Luo-Rudy; PB, Priebe-Beuckelman; CRN, Courtemanche and coworkers; GHK, Goldmann-Hodgkin-Katz.

although data suggest that extracellular calcium also plays a
role in inactivation (60). Finally, no data were available on the
nature of calcium dynamics under high frequencies. We as-
sumed calcium dynamics to stay stable under high frequencies.
In addition, we assumed CICR to depend in a saturating
manner on sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium content.

There is no agreement of experimental data on steady-state
inactivation of INa. Some researchers give a value of ⫺85 mV
for the voltage of half-inactivation (44, 55, 64), whereas others
give a value of around ⫺65 mV (30, 40, 58). Rather than
making a compromise, we decided to base our steady-state
inactivation curves on data from Nagatomo et al. (44) because
we also used their data for steady-state activation and time
constants and wanted to maintain consistency.

Experiments are often performed at different temperatures.
This is especially true for INa voltage-clamp experiments,
where the temperature is usually below the physiological
temperature to slow dynamics and limit current size. We
derived a single Q10 factor and used this to rescale all INa time
constants to 37°. Because it is not clear how steady-state curves
change with temperature, we performed a linear extrapolation
of the half-(in)activation voltages and slopes.

Experiments are also performed in the presence of different
combinations of pharmacological agents used to suppress other
currents. It is known that some of these chemicals have an
impact on the dynamics of the measured current, e.g., Cd2⫹
used to block L-type calcium current is known to inﬂuence
steady-state curves of Ito current. We corrected experimental
steady-state curves of Ito for the presence of Cd2⫹ by shifting
them 10 mV in the positive direction.

To perform single-cell voltage-clamp experiments, cells
must be isolated. These isolation procedures can have profound
effects on the density of particular currents. A clear example of
this are the IKs and IKr currents. IKs and IKr current densities
found during voltage-clamp experiments are in sharp contrast
with the clear relevance of these currents for action potential
duration and restitution and the different behavior of M cells.
We therefore decided to apply current densities for IKs and IKr

that are substantially larger than experimentally measured
densities and that allow us to realistically simulate the conse-
quences of IKr block and the behavior of M cells.

In conclusion, we propose a new model for human ventric-
ular epicardial, endocardial, and M cells based on ionic cur-
rents measured in human ventricular cells or measured in
expression experiments using human cardiac channels. The
model reproduces a number of experimental observations,
ranging from voltage-clamp current traces and I-V curves, to
AP morphology, as well as APD and CV restitution curves and
the contraction staircase. Because of its relative computational
simplicity, the model is suitable for application in large-scale
spatial simulations, which are necessary for investigating the
dynamics of reentrant arrhythmias. The latter is illustrated with
the simulation of a reentrant spiral wave in a 2D sheet of
epicardial ventricular tissue.

APPENDIX

Reversal Potentials

EX ⫽

RT
zF

log

Xo
Xi

for X ⫽ Na⫹, K⫹, Ca2⫹

EKs ⫽

RT
F

log

Ko ⫹ pKNaNao
Ki ⫹ pKNaNai

Fast Na⫹ Current

INa ⫽ GNam3hj共V ⫺ ENa兲

m⬁ ⫽

1

关1 ⫹ e共⫺56.86⫺V兲/9.03兴2

1

1 ⫹ e共⫺60⫺V兲/5

␣m ⫽

0.1

␤m ⫽

1 ⫹ e共V⫹35兲/5

⫹

0.1

1 ⫹ e共V⫺50兲/200

␶m ⫽ ␣m␤m

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

H1586

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

1

h⬁ ⫽

关1 ⫹ e共V⫹71.55兲/7.43兴2
if V ⱖ ⫺40

␣h ⫽ 0

(32)

(33)

␣h ⫽ 0.057e⫺共V⫹80兲/6.8

otherwise

0.77

␤h⫽

0.13[1⫹e⫺(V⫹10.66)/11.1]

if V ⱖ ⫺40

(34)

␤h ⫽ 2.7e0.079V ⫹ 3.1 ⫻ 105e0.3485V

otherwise

␶h ⫽

1

␣h ⫹ ␤h

1

j⬁ ⫽

关1 ⫹ e共V⫹71.55兲/7.43兴2
if V ⱖ ⫺40

␣j ⫽ 0

冉⫺2.5428 ⫻ 104e0.2444V ⫺ 6.948

⫻ 10⫺6e⫺0.04391V

冊 共V ⫹ 37.78兲

(35)

(36)

(37)

otherwise

␶fca ⫽ 2 ms

⫽ k

dfca
dt
fca⬁ ⬎ fca

fca⬁ ⫺ fca

␶fca
and V ⬎ ⫺60 mV

otherwise

if

k ⫽ 0
k ⫽ 1

Transient Outward Current

Ito ⫽ Gtors共V ⫺ EK兲

For all cell types

r⬁ ⫽

1

1 ⫹ e共20⫺V兲/6

␶r ⫽ 9.5e⫺共V⫹40兲2/1800 ⫹ 0.8

For epicardial and M cells

s⬁ ⫽

1

1 ⫹ e共V⫹20兲/5
5

␶s ⫽ 85e⫺共V⫹45兲2/320 ⫹

1 ⫹ e共V⫺20兲/5

⫹ 3

if V ⱖ ⫺40

(38)

For endocardial cells

␣j ⫽

1 ⫹ e0.311共V⫹79.23兲
0.6e0.057V

␤j ⫽

␤j ⫽

1 ⫹ e⫺0.1共V⫹32兲
0.02424e⫺0.01052V
1 ⫹ e⫺0.1378共V⫹40.14兲

otherwise

␶j ⫽

1

␣j ⫹ ␤j

L-type Ca2⫹ Current

ICaL ⫽ GCaLdffCa4

VF 2
RT

Caie2VF/RT ⫺ 0.341Cao

e2VF/RT ⫺ 1

d⬁ ⫽

1

1 ⫹ e共⫺5⫺V兲/7.5

␣d ⫽

1.4

1 ⫹ e共⫺35⫺V兲/13

⫹ 0.25

␤d ⫽

1.4

1 ⫹ e共V⫹5兲/5

1

␥d ⫽

1 ⫹ e共50⫺V兲/20
␶d ⫽ ␣d␤d ⫹ ␥d

f⬁ ⫽

1

1 ⫹ e共V⫹20兲/7

␶f ⫽ 1125e⫺共V⫹27兲2/240 ⫹

165

1 ⫹ e共25⫺V兲/10

⫹ 80

␣fca ⫽

1

1 ⫹ 共Cai/0.000325兲8

␤fca ⫽

␥fca ⫽

0.1

1 ⫹ e共Cai⫺0.0005兲/0.0001

0.2

1 ⫹ e共Cai⫺0.00075兲/0.0008

fca⬁ ⫽

␣fca ⫹ ␤fca ⫹ ␥fca ⫹ 0.23

1.46

s⬁ ⫽

1

1 ⫹ e共V⫹28兲/5

␶s ⫽ 1,000e⫺共V⫹67兲2/1,000 ⫹ 8

Slow Delayed Rectiﬁer Current

IKs ⫽ GKsxs

2共V ⫺ EKs兲

xs⬁ ⫽

1

1 ⫹ e共⫺5⫺V兲/14

␣xs ⫽

1,100

冑1 ⫹ e共⫺10⫺V兲/6

␤xs ⫽

1

1 ⫹ e共V⫺60兲/20

␶xs ⫽ ␣xs␤xs

Rapid Delayed Rectiﬁer Current

IKr ⫽ GKr冑Ko

5.4

xr1xr2共V ⫺ EK兲

xr1⬁ ⫽

␣xr1 ⫽

␤xr1 ⫽

1

1 ⫹ e共⫺26⫺V兲/7

450

1 ⫹ e共⫺45⫺V兲/10

6

1 ⫹ e共V⫹30兲/11.5

␶xr1 ⫽ ␣xr1␤xr1

xr2⬁ ⫽

␣xr2 ⫽

1

1 ⫹ e共V⫹88兲/24

3

1 ⫹ e共⫺60⫺V兲/20

␤xr2 ⫽

1.12

1 ⫹ e共V⫺60兲/20

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

(52)

(53)

(54)

(55)

(56)

(57)

(58)

(59)

(60)

(61)

(62)

(63)

(64)

(65)

(66)

(67)

(68)

(69)

(70)

(71)

(72)

(73)

(74)

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

H1587

␶xr2 ⫽ ␣xr2␤xr2

Inward Rectiﬁer K⫹ Current

IK1 ⫽ GK1冑Ko

5.4

xK1⬁共V ⫺ EK兲

␤K1 ⫽

␣K1 ⫽

0.1

1 ⫹ e0.06共V⫺EK⫺200兲

3e0.0002共V⫺EK⫹100兲 ⫹ e0.1共V⫺EK⫺10兲

1 ⫹ e⫺0.5共V⫺EK兲

xK1⬁ ⫽

␣K1

␣K1 ⫹ ␤K1

Na⫹/Ca2⫹ Exchanger Current

e␥VF/RTNai

3Cao ⫺ e共␥⫺1兲VF/RTNao

3Cai␣

3 ⫹ Nao

3兲共KmCa ⫹ Cao兲共1 ⫹ ksate共␥⫺1兲VF/RT兲

INaCa ⫽ kNaCa

共KmNai
Na⫹/K⫹ Pump Current
INaK ⫽

(75)

(76)

(77)

(78)

(79)

(80)

KoNai

共Ko ⫹ KmK兲共Nai ⫹ KmNa兲共1 ⫹ 0.1245e⫺0.1VF/RT ⫹ 0.0353e⫺VF/RT兲
(81)

dCaitotal

dt

⫽ ⫺

ICaL ⫹ IbCa ⫹ IpCa ⫺ 2INaCa

2VCF

⫹ Ileak ⫺ Iup ⫹ Irel

(94)

Casrbufsr ⫽

Casr ⫻ Bufsr
Casr ⫹ Kbufsr

dCasrtotal

dt

⫽

VC
VSR

共⫺Ileak ⫹ Iup ⫺ Irel兲

Sodium and Potassium Dynamics

⫽ ⫺

INa ⫹ IbNa ⫹ 3INaK ⫹ 3INaCa

dNai
dt
IK1 ⫹ Ito ⫹ IKr ⫹ IKs ⫺ 2INaK ⫹ IpK ⫹ Istim ⫺ Iax

VCF

VCF

dKi
dt

⫽ ⫺

(95)

(96)

(97)

(98)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are thankful

to Dr. O. Bernus and Dr. R. Wilders for valuable

discussions.

This work was initiated during a visit of A. V. Panﬁlov at the Isaac Newton

Institute for Mathematical Sciences in 2001.

GRANTS

This work was funded by the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc
Research (NWO) through Grant 620061351 of the Research Council for
Physical Sciences (EW) (to K. H. W. J. ten Tusscher), the Netherlands
National Computer Facilities Foundation (NCF) through Grant SG-095, the
British Heart Foundation, the British Medical Research Council, the Welcome
Trust, and Physiome Sciences (to D. Noble and P. J. Noble)

PNaK

IpCa

IpK

IpCa ⫽ GpCa

Cai

KpCa ⫹ Cai

IpK ⫽ GpK

V ⫺ EK

1 ⫹ e共25⫺V兲/5.98

IbNa ⫽ GbNa共V ⫺ ENa兲
IbCa ⫽ GbCa共V ⫺ ECa兲

Ileak ⫽ Vleak共Casr ⫺ Cai兲

Background Currents

Calcium Dynamics

Iup ⫽

Irel ⫽冉arel

Vmaxup
1 ⫹ Kup
2
Casr

2 ⫹ Casr
2
brel

2
2 /Cai

⫹ crel冊dg

g⬁ ⫽

g⬁ ⫽

1 ⫹ Cai

1
6/0.000356
1

1 ⫹ Cai

16/0.0003516

if Cai ⱕ 0.00035

otherwise

␶g ⫽ 2 ms

⫽ k

dg
dt
g⬁ ⬎ g

g⬁ ⫺ g

␶g

and V ⬎ ⫺60 mV

otherwise
Cai ⫻ Bufc
Cai ⫹ Kbufc

Caibufc ⫽

if

k ⫽ 0
k ⫽ 1

(82)

REFERENCES

1. Beeler GW and Reuter H. Reconstruction of the action potential of

ventricular myocardial ﬁbers. J Physiol 268: 177–210, 1977.

2. Benitah J, Bailly P, D’Agrosa M, Da Ponte J, Delgado C, and Lorente
P. Slow inward current in single cells isolated from adult human ventri-
cles. Pﬂu¨gers Arch 421: 176–187, 1992.

3. Bernus O, Wilders R, Zemlin CW, Verschelde H, and Panﬁlov AV. A
computationally efﬁcient electrophysiological model of human ventricular
cells. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 282: H2296–H2308, 2002.

4. Beuckelmann DJ, Nabauer M, and Erdmann E. Characteristics of
calcium-current in isolated human ventricular myocytes from patients with
terminal heart failure. J Mol Cell Cardiol 23: 929–937, 1991.

5. Boyett MR and Fedida D. A computer simulation of the effect of heart

rate on ion concentrations in the heart. J Theor Biol 132: 15–27, 1988.

6. Cao J, Qu Z, Kim Y, Wu T, Garﬁnkel A, Weiss JN, Karagueuzian HS,
and Chen P. Spatiotemporal heterogeneity in the induction of ventricular
ﬁbrillation by rapid pacing, importance of cardiac restitution properties.
Circ Res 84: 1318–1331, 1999.

7. Chudin E, Goldhaber J, Garﬁnkel J, Weiss A, and Kogan B. Intracel-
lular Ca2⫹ dynamics and the stability of ventricular tachycardia. Biophys
J 77: 2930–2941, 1999.

8. Courtemanche M, Ramirez RJ, and Nattel S. Ionic mechanisms under-
lying human atrial action potential properties: insights from a mathemat-
ical model. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 275: H301–H321, 1998.

9. Drouin E, Charpentier F, Gauthier C, Laurent K, and Le Marec H.
Electrophysiologic characteristics of cells spanning the left ventricular
wall of human heart: evidence for the presence of M cells. J Am Coll
Cardiol 26: 185–192, 1995.

10. Drouin E, Lande G, and Charpentier F. Amiodarone reduces transmu-
ral heterogeneity of repolarization in the human heart. J Am Coll Cardiol
32: 1063–1067, 1998.

11. Ebihara L and Johnson EA. Fast sodium current in cardiac muscle, a

quantitative description. Biophys J 32: 779–790, 1980.

12. Eﬁmov IR, Krinsky VI, and Jalife J. Dynamics of rotating vortices in
the Beeler-Reuter model of cardiac tissue. Chaos Solitons Fractals 5:
513–526, 1995.

13. Endresen LP, Hall K, Hoye JS, and Myrheim J. A theory for the

membrane potential of living cells. Eur Biophys J 29: 90–103, 2000.

14. Endresen LP and Skarland N. Limit cycle oscillations in pacemaker

cells. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 47: 1134–1137, 2000.

(83)

(84)

(85)

(86)

(87)

(88)

(89)

(90)

(91)

(92)

(93)

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

H1588

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

15. Fast VG, Eﬁmov IR, and Krinsky VI. Transition from circular to linear

cores in excitable media. Phys Lett A 151: 157–161, 1990.

16. Fenton F and Karma A. Vortex dynamics in three-dimensional contin-
uous myocardium with ﬁber rotation: ﬁlament instability and ﬁbrillation.
Chaos 8: 20–47, 1998.

17. Garﬁnkel A, Kim YH, Voroshilovsky O, Qu Z, Kil JR, Lee MH, Kara-
gueuzian HS, Weiss JN, and Chen PS. Preventing ventricular ﬁbrillation by
ﬂattening cardiac restitution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97: 6061–6066, 2000.
18. Gintant GA. Characterization and functional consequences of delayed
rectiﬁer current transient in ventricular repolarization. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol 278: H806–H817, 2000.

19. Girouard SD, Pastore JM, Laurita KR, Greogry KW, and Rosen-
baum DS. Optical mapping in a new guinea pig model of ventricular
tachycardia reveals mechanisms for multiple wavelengths in a single
reentrant circuit. Circulation 93: 603–613, 1996.

20. Grantham CJ and Cannell MB. Ca2⫹ inﬂux during the cardiac action
potential in guinea pig ventricular myocytes. Circ Res 79: 194–200, 1996.
21. Greenstein JL and Winslow RL. An integrative model of the cardiac
ventricular myocyte incorporating local control of Ca2⫹ release. Biophys
J 83: 2918–2945, 2002.

22. Greenstein JL, Wu R, Po S, Tomaselli GF, and Winslow RL. Role of
the calcium-independent transient outward current Ito1 in shaping action
potential morphology and duration. Circ Res 87: 1026–1033, 2000.

23. Hodgkin AL and Huxley AF. A quantitative description of membrane
current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J Physiol
117: 500–544, 1952.

24. Hund TJ, Kucera JP, Otani NF, and Rudy Y. Ionic charge conservation
and long-term steady state in the Luo-Rudy dynamic cell model. Biophys
J 81: 3324–3331, 2001.

25. Iost N, Virag L, Opincariu M, Szecsi J, Varro A, and Papp JG.
Delayed rectiﬁer potassium current in undiseased human ventricular myo-
cytes. Cardiovasc Res 40: 508–515, 1998.

26. Beuckelmann DJ, Nabauer M, and Erdmann E. Intracellular calcium
handling in isolated ventricular myocytes from patients with terminal heart
failure. Circulation 94: 992–1002, 1992.

27. Janvier NC and Boyett MR. The role of the Na-Ca exchange current in

the cardiac action potential. Cardiovasc Res 32: 69–84, 1996.

28. Johnson JP, Mullins FM, and Bennet PB. Human Ether-a-go-go-related
gene K⫹ channel gating probed with extracellular Ca2⫹, evidence for two
distinct voltage sensors. J Gen Physiol 113: 565–580, 1999.

29. Jongsma HJ and Wilders R. Gap junctions in cardiovascular disease.

Circ Res 86: 1193–1197, 2000.

30. Kambouris NG, Nuss HB, Johns DC, Marban E, Tomaselli GF, and
Balser JR. A revised view of cardiac sodium channel “blockade” in the
long-QT syndrome. J Clin Invest 105: 1133–1140, 2000.

31. Karma A. Electrical alternans and spiral wave breakup in cardiac tissue.

Chaos 4: 461–472, 1994.

32. Koller ML, Riccio ML, and Gilmour RF Jr. Dynamic restitution of
action potential duration during electrical alternans and ventricular ﬁbril-
lation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 275: H1635–H1642, 1998.

33. Koumi S, Backer CL, and Arentzen CE. Characterization of inwardly
rectifying K⫹ channel in human cardiac myocytes. Circulation 92: 164–
174, 1995.

34. Li G, Feng J, Yue L, Carrier M, and Nattel S. Evidence for two
components of delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ current in human ventricular myo-
cytes. Circ Res 78: 689–696, 1996.

35. Li G and Nattel S. Properties of human atrial ICa at physiological
temperatures and relevance to action potential. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol 272: H227–H235, 1997.

36. Li GR, Feng J, Yue L, and Carrier M. Transmural heterogeneity of
action potentials and Ito1 in myocytes isolated from the human right
ventricle. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 275: H369–H377, 1998.

37. Luo C and Rudy Y. A model of the ventricular cardiac action potential,
depolarization, repolarization, and their interaction. Circ Res 68: 1501–
1526, 1991.

38. Luo C and Rudy Y. A dynamic model of the cardiac ventricular action
potential. I. simulations of ionic currents and concentration changes. Circ
Res 74: 1071–1096, 1994.

39. Magyar J, Szentandrassy N, Banyasz T, Fulop L, Varro A, and Nanasi
PP. Effects of thymol on calcium and potassium currents in canine and
human ventricular cardiomyocytes. Br J Pharmacol 136: 330–338, 2002.
40. Makita N, Shirai N, Wang DW, Sasaki K, George AL, Kanno M, and
Kitabatake A. Cardiac Na⫹ channel dysfunction in Brugada syndrome is
aggravated by ␤1-subunit. Circulation 101: 54–60, 2000.

41. Mewes T and Ravens U. L-type calcium currents of human myocytes
from ventricle of non-failing and failing hearts and atrium. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 26: 1307–1320, 1994.

42. Morgan JM, Cunningham D, and Rowland E. Dispersion of monopha-
sic action potential duration: demonstrable in humans after premature
ventricular extrastimulation but not in steady state. J Am Coll Cardiol 19:
1244–1253, 1992.

43. Nabauer M, Beuckelmann DJ, Uberfuhr P, and Steinbeck G. Regional
differences in current density and rate-dependent properties of the tran-
sient outward current in subepicardial and subendocardial myocytes of
human left ventricle. Circulation 93: 168–177, 1996.

44. Nagatomo T, Fan Z, Ye B, Tonkovich GS, January CT, Kyle JW, and
Makielski JC. Temperature dependence of early and late currents in
human cardiac wild-type and long Q-T ⌬KPQ Na⫹ channels. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 275: H2016–H2024, 1998.

45. Noble D, Varghese A, Kohl P, and Noble P. Improved guinea-pig
ventricular cell model incorporating a diadic space, IKr and IKs, and length-
and tension-dependent processes. Can J Cardiol 14: 123–134, 1998.

46. Pelzmann B, Schaffer P, Bernhart E, Lang P, Machler H, Rigler B,
and Koidl B. L-type calcium current in human ventricular myocytes at a
physiological temperature from children with tetralogy of Fallot. Cardio-
vasc Res 38: 424–432, 1998.

47. Pereon Y, Demolombe S, Baro I, Drouin E, Charpentier F, and
Escande D. Differential expression of KvLQT1 isoforms across the
human ventricular wall. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 278: H1908–
H1915, 2000.

48. Pieske B, Maier LS, Bers DM, and Hasenfuss G. Ca2⫹ handling and
sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2⫹ content in isolated failing and non-failing
human myocardium. Circ Res 85: 38–46, 1999.

49. Pieske B, Maier LS, Piacentino V, Weisser J, Hasenfuss G, and
Houser S. Rate dependence of (Na⫹)i and contractility in nonfailing and
failing human myocardium. Circ Res 106: 447–453, 2002.

50. Plonsey R and Barr RC. Bioelectricity. New York: Plenum, 1989.
51. Priebe L and Beuckelmann DJ. Simulation study of cellular electric

properties in heart failure. Circ Res 82: 1206–1223, 1998.

52. Qu Z, Weiss JN, and Garﬁnkel A. Cardiac electrical restitution proper-
ties and stability of reentrant spiral waves: a simulation study. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 276: H269–H283, 1999.

53. Rice JJ, Jafri MS, and Winslow RL. Modeling gain and gradedness of
Ca2⫹ release in the functional unit of the cardiac diadic space. Biophys J
77: 1871–1884, 1999.

54. Rush S and Larsen H. A practical algorithm for solving dynamic

membrane equations. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 25: 389–392, 1978.

55. Sakakibara Y, Wasserstrom JA, Furukawa T, Jia H, Arentzen CE,
Hartz RS, and Singe DH. Characterization of the sodium current in single
human atrial myocytes. Circ Res 71: 535–546, 1992.

56. Sakmann BFAS, Spindler AJ, Bryant SM, Linz KW, and Noble D.
Distribution of a persistent sodium current across the ventricular wall in
guinea pig. Circ Res 87: 910–914, 2000.

57. Schmidt U, Hajjar RJ, Helm PA, Kim CS, Doye AA, and Gwathmey
JK. Contribution of abnormal sarcoplasmic reticulum ATPase activity to
systolic and diastolic dysfunction in human heart failure. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 30: 1929–1937, 1998.

58. Schneider M, Proebstle T, Hombach V, Hannekum A, and Rudel R.
Characterization of the sodium currents in isolated human cardiocytes.
Pﬂu¨gers Arch 428: 84–90, 1994.

59. Smith PL and Yellen G. Fast and slow voltage sensor movements in

HERG potassium channels. J Gen Physiol 119: 275–293, 2002.

60. Sun H, Leblanc N, and Nattel S. Mechanisms of inactivation of L-type
calcium channels in human atrial myocytes. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol 272: H1625–H1635, 1997.

61. Taggart P, Sutton PMI, Opthof T, Coronel R, Trimlett R, Pugsley W,
and Kallis P. Inhomogeneous transmural conduction during early ischemia in
patients with coronary artery disease. J Mol Cell Cardiol 32: 621–639, 2000.
62. Virag L, Iost N, Opincariu M, Szolnoky J, Szecsi J, Bogats G,
Szenohradszky P, Varro A, and Papp JP. The slow component of the
delayed rectiﬁer potassium current in undiseased human ventricular myo-
cytes. Cardiovasc Res 49: 790–797, 2001.

63. Viswanathan PC, Bezzina CR, George AL, Roden DM, Wilde AAM,
and Balser JR. Gating-dependent mechanism for ﬂecainide action in
SCN5A-linked arrhythmia syndromes. Circulation 104: 1200–1205, 2001.

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

HUMAN VENTRICULAR AP MODEL

H1589

64. Wan X, Chen S, Sadeghpour A, Wang Q, and Kirsch GE. Accel-
erated inactivation in a mutant Na⫹ channel associated with idiopathic
ventricular ﬁbrillation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 280: H354–
H360, 2001.

65. Wang DW, Makita N, Kirabatake A, Balser JR, and George AL.
Enhanced Na⫹ channel intermediate inactivation in Brugada syndrome.
Circ Res 87: e37–e43, 2000.

66. Wang Z, Fermini B, and Nattel S. Rapid and slow components of
delayed rectiﬁer current in human atrial myocytes. Cardiovasc Res 28:
1540–1546, 1994.

67. Watanabe MA, Fenton FH, Evans SJ, Hastings HM, and Karma A.
Mechanisms for discordant alternans. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 12:
196–206, 2001.

68. Wettwer E, Amos GJ, Posival H, and Ravens U. Transient outward
current in human ventricular myocytes of subepicardial and subendocar-
dial origin. Circ Res 75: 473–482, 1994.

69. Xie F, Qu Z, Garﬁnkel A, and Weiss JN. Effects of simulated ischemia
on spiral wave stability. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 280: H1667–
H1673, 2001.

70. Yue L, Feng J, Li GR, and Nattel S. Transient outward and de-
layed rectiﬁer currents in canine atrium: properties and role of isola-
tion methods. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 270: H2157–H2168,
1996.

71. Zeng J, Laurita KR, Rosenbaum DS, and Rudy Y. Two components of
the delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ current in ventricular myocytes of the guinea pig
type. Theoretical formulation and their role in repolarization. Circ Res 77:
140–152, 1995.

72. Zhou Z, Gong Q, Ye B, Fan Z, Makielski JC, Robertson GA, and
January CT. Properties of HERG channels stably expressed in HEK
293 cells studied at physiological temperatures. Biophys J 74: 230–
241, 1973.

73. Zygmunt AC, Eddlestone GT, Thomas GP, Nesterenko VV, and
Antzelevitch C. Larger late sodium conductance in M cells contributes to
electrical heterogeneity in canine ventricle. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol 281: H689–H697, 2001.

74. Zygmunt AC, Goodrow RJ, and Antzelevitch C. INaCa contributes to
electrical heterogeneity within the canine ventricle. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol 278: H1671–H1678, 2000.

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • VOL 286 • APRIL 2004 • www.ajpheart.org

