554

Biophysical Journal Volume 100 February 2011 554–563

Roles of Subcellular Na
of Cardiac Conduction

D

Channel Distributions in the Mechanism

* Takashi Ashihara,

†
Kunichika Tsumoto,
†
The Center for Advanced Medical Engineering and Informatics, Osaka University and
Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan;
Medicine, Heart Rhythm Center, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan; and
Management, Research Institute, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Osaka, Japan

Ryo Haraguchi,

§
Kazuo Nakazawa,

‡

§

{
Division of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,

‡
Department of Cardiovascular and Respiratory
§
Laboratory of Biomedical Science and Information

and Yoshihisa Kurachi

*

{†

þ

þ

channel play an important role in the action potential propagation. The
ABSTRACTS The gap junction and voltage-gated Na
purpose of this study was to elucidate the roles of subcellular Na
channel distribution in action potential propagation. To achieve
this, we constructed the myocardial strand model, which can calculate the current via intercellular cleft (electric-ﬁeld mechanism)
together with gap-junctional current (gap-junctional mechanism). We conducted simulations of action potential propagation in
a myoﬁber model where cardiomyocytes were electrically coupled with gap junctions alone or with both the gap junctions
and the electric ﬁeld mechanism. Then we found that the action potential propagation was greatly affected by the subcellular
distribution of Na
channels in the lateral
membrane was important to ensure the stability of propagation under conditions of reduced gap-junctional coupling. In the poorly
channels in the lateral membrane, the slowing of action potential propagation resulted from the
coupled tissue with sufﬁcient Na
þ
periodic and intermittent dysfunction of the electric ﬁeld mechanism. The changes in the subcellular Na
channel distribution
might be in part responsible for the homeostatic excitation propagation in the diseased heart.

channels in the presence of the electric ﬁeld mechanism. The presence of Na

þ

þ

þ

INTRODUCTION

The coordinated propagation of electrical excitation is
crucial for normal contractile function in the heart. The
abnormalities in action potential (AP) propagation, such
as slow conduction and unidirectional block that underlie
conduction heterogeneities in cardiac tissue, are involved
in cardiac arrhythmias.

The electrical excitation in cardiac myocytes is known to
propagate from cell to cell through gap junctions between
adjacent cells. The electrical conductance between cells
can be changed by altering the gap-junctional conductance
(Gg) due to the effect of drugs (1,2), myocardial ischemia
(3,4), or by changing the expression of connexins (5,6)
(gap-junction channel-forming proteins (7)). In fact, gap-
junctional coupling is attenuated by an alteration of the
pattern of connexin expression in the cell membrane under
various pathophysiological conditions (8–10). Experimental
(11) and numerical
(12,13) studies have shown that
a reduced gap-junctional coupling leads to the slowing of
conduction velocity (CV). However, in several studies using
genetically engineered murine models such as connexin
(Cx) 43 knockout mice, Cx43 heterozygotes, and cardiac-
restricted Cx43 conditional knockout (CKO) mice (14–17),

Submitted July 26, 2010, and accepted for publication December 20, 2010.

*Correspondence: ykurachi@pharma2.med.osaka-u.ac.jp or
pharma2.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

tsumoto@

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons-Attribution Noncommercial License (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/), which permits unrestricted noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work
is properly cited.

Editor: Andrew McCulloch.
Ó 2011 by the Biophysical Society
0006-3495/11/02/0554/10 $2.00

it has been pointed out that the relationship between gap-
junctional coupling and CV might be complex. In particular,
despite the fact that the Gg in Cx43 CKO mice was decreased
to <10% of the one in wild-type mice (17), the actual CV in
the Cx43 CKO mice measured by Gutstein et al. (16) was as
much as 50% of that in wild-type.

Such experimental observations are not fully reproduced
in numerical models of AP propagation via gap junctions
(12,13). Therefore, it is probable that other propagating
mechanisms contribute to AP propagation. In previous theo-
retical studies (18,19), a propagating mechanism respon-
sible for a large negative extracellular potential
in the
narrow cleft space of intercellular junctions, the so-called
electric ﬁeld (EF) mechanism, was proposed as an alterna-
tive to the gap-junctional mechanism. The EF mechanism
postulates that during AP propagation from cell to cell,
channel (NaCh) current on the prox-
the large inward Na
imal side of an intercellular cleft generates the large nega-
tive extracellular potential within the cleft, which, in turn,
activates the inward NaCh current in the adjacent cell on
the distal side of the cleft.

þ

Voltage-gated NaCh current is responsible for the onset
of AP and the AP propagation in the myocardium, and
therefore, modulating the NaCh function has an important
impact on membrane excitability. It has been reported that
cardiac-type NaChs together with gap junctions are inten-
sively expressed at junctional membrane (JM) facing inter-
cellular cleft (i.e., intercalated disk), but are also slightly
expressed in the lateral part of the cell membrane (LM)
of the myocyte (20–23). The distribution of NaChs may
change under pathophysiological cardiac remodeling (23).

doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.12.3716

þ

Na

Channel Distribution and Conduction

A recent simulation study (24) incorporating both the gap-
junctional mechanism and the EF mechanism revealed that
the localization of NaChs at the JM could maintain AP
propagation even if gap-junctional coupling was greatly
reduced. Nevertheless,
the physiological signiﬁcance of
the distribution of NaChs at LM on AP propagation is not
yet fully understood.

In this study, we conducted simulations of AP propaga-
tion along a myocardial ﬁber electrically coupled with
gap-junctional mechanism alone or with both the gap-
junctional mechanism and the EF mechanism at each cell
junction. The purpose of this study was to elucidate how
the NaChs, expressed at both JM and LM, play roles in
AP propagation. In this article, we conﬁrmed that both
the gap-junctional mechanism and the EF mechanism
contribute to the AP propagation in ventricles as reported
previously (18,19,24), and showed that the property of
AP propagation is greatly changed by the different sub-
cellular distribution of NaChs if the EF mechanism is the
case.

We found that the presence of NaChs in the LM was
important to ensure the stability of AP propagation under
conditions of decreased gap-junctional coupling, and that
during the AP propagation in the poorly coupled tissue
with sufﬁcient NaChs in the LM, the slowing of AP propa-
gation resulted from the periodic and intermittent dysfunc-
tion of the EF mechanism. In addition, without NaChs
distribution to the LM, AP propagation based on the EF
mechanism was unstable, and the morphology of the prop-
agating AP was greatly affected, suggesting that changes
in the subcellular NaCh distribution might be in part respon-
sible for the homeostatic excitation propagation in the
diseased heart.

A

B

C

555

METHODS

Myoﬁber model

To study the effect of subcellular distribution of NaChs on AP propagation,
we used a one-dimensional myoﬁber consisting of serially arranged ventric-
ular cells shown in Fig. 1 A. In this model, all cells had the same length
(100 mm) and width (22 mm) (13), to prevent the effects of heterogeneity
of cell size and shape on AP propagation (25).

The intercellular clefts facing at JMs were very narrow (5 ~25 nm)
(5,7,26), and the resistance of the extracellular cleft space was thought to
be higher than that of the bulk medium. Thus, an inward NaCh current
generated at the JM induced a large negative extracellular potential within
the narrow cleft space (18,19,24). We assumed that the adjacent cells are
electrically coupled with the current through the gap junction at JM and
with the change in the cleft potential (cleft model, Fig. 1 B). We also con-
structed a model coupled only with gap junctions (noncleft model, Fig. 1 C)
to compare with the cleft model.

The whole cell membrane of each myocyte was divided into ﬁve
segments; three segments of LM and two segments of JM (Fig. 1, B and
C). In Fig. 1, B and C, the myoplasmic resistance (Ri) in between nodes
in a myocyte was deﬁned by

Ri ¼ r

, la=pr2;

myo

where rmyo is the myoplasmic resistivity (150 U,cm) (13), la is the length of
the LM segment (33.3 mm), and r is the radius of the myocardial cell
(11 mm). A value of 395 kU was chosen for the gap-junctional resistance
(Rg) as the control value as it was identical to the myoplasmic resistance
in an entire myocardial cell (13), i.e., the gap-junctional conductance
(Gg) was 2.534 mS. The radial cleft resistance (Rj) was given by

Rj ¼ r

=8pw;

ext

according to Katz (27), while the series axial resistance (Rd) was assumed to
be

Rd ¼ r

, w=pr2;

ext

where rext is the extracellular resistivity (150 U∙cm) (24), and w is the
cleft width, which is the distance between the pre- and postjunctional

FIGURE 1 Schematic of
strand model and
equivalent circuits. (A) The strand model consists
of myocardial cells with a cylindrical shape. The
length and radius of the myocardial cell are
100 mm and 11 mm, respectively. (B and C) The
equivalent circuit of
the cleft and noncleft
models, respectively. Each membrane segment is
composed of an active membrane model (AMM)
and a membrane capacitance. VN
represents extra-
j
cellular cleft potential just after the Nth cell. The
values VN
e;n represent transmem-
brane, intracellular, and extracellular potentials,
respectively, of nth segment of the Nth cell. The
values n ¼ 1 and 5 denote junctional segments,
and VN
e;n. The values Rg and Rj
represent
the gap-junctional resistance and the
cleft resistance, respectively.

i;n   VN

m;n ¼ VN

m;n, VN

i;n, and VN

Biophysical Journal 100(3) 554–563

556

membranes
given by

(pre- and post-JMs). The cleft conductance (Gj) was

Gj ¼ 1=Rj:

Frequently used abbreviations and acronyms are listed in Table 1.

Membrane model

Each segment of the cell membrane consisted of a membrane capacitance
and an active membrane model (AMM) as shown in Fig. 1, B and C. The
membrane dynamics was described with the AMM proposed by our group
(28,29), in which the L-type calcium channel current and the values of the
maximum conductance related to the potassium currents, IKr, IKs, IKp, and
Ito were modiﬁed from the Luo-Rudy dynamic model (30,31) to reproduce
intrinsic AP properties in the feline epicardial myocyte (32). Furthermore,
the initial values of [Na]i and [Na]o were set to 12.1 and 140 mM, respec-
tively, in this study to establish a more realistic situation (31). Speciﬁc
parameters in the myoﬁber consisting of the AMM and initial conditions
can be found in Table S1 in the Supporting Material.

The maximum conductance of NaChs per unit area was set to 16 mS/cm2
and therefore the entire NaCh conductance of each cell corresponded to
~1.23 mS (30,31), which we deﬁned as the control value (gNa). This value
is just a standard value (16 mS/cm2) in the computer model, and this value
might be larger or smaller in the pathological conditions. In this study, to
investigate what effect the subcellular NaCh distribution had on AP propa-
gation, we varied the gNa in the range around the control value, and we used
two conditions, i.e.,

1. All NaChs were distributed only in the JM and there were no NaChs

along the LM.

2. NaChs were distributed to both JM and LM.

Throughout the article, the NaCh conductances of JM and LM were
expressed as a percentage of the gNa, i.e., %gNa,JM and %gNa,LM, respec-
tively. The myoﬁber model with 100%gNa,JM and 50%gNa,LM, for instance,
indicates that each cell had altogether an increased number (150%) of
NaChs relative to the control case.

Numerical calculations

From the equivalent circuits in Fig. 1, B and C, we could derive a circuit
equation (details of the derivation of the circuit equation are given in the

TABLE 1 Frequently used abbreviations and acronyms

Abbreviation

Deﬁnition

CV
Cx
CKO
AP
EF
NaCh
JM
LM
AMM
gNa

%gNa,JM
%gNa,LM
%gNa,JMþLM
Gg
Gj
Ig
Vj

Conduction velocity
Connexin
Conditional knockout
Action potential
Electrical ﬁeld
þ
Na
Junctional membrane facing intracellular cleft
Lateral part of the cell membrane
Active membrane model
Control value of the entire NaCh conductance

channel

of each cell

NaCh conductance of JM
NaCh conductance of LM

Total NaCh conductance (%gNa,JMþ%gNa,LM)

Gap-junctional conductance
Cleft conductance
Gap-junctional current
Cleft potential

Biophysical Journal 100(3) 554–563

Tsumoto et al.

Supporting Material). The transmembrane potential in each segment is rep-
resented by




VN
m;k; t

CmdVN

m;k=dt þ Iion

¼ iN

m;k

for N ¼ 1; .; 64; and k ¼ 1; .; 5; where Cm is the membrane capacitance
with speciﬁc capacitance 1 mF/cm2, Iion (mA/mF) is the total ionic current in
m;kðmA=mFÞ is the transmembrane current. For an arbitrary
the AMM, and iN
time t, all the transmembrane currents, iN
m;k, were obtained by solving the
circuit equation with the transmembrane potentials, as an initial condition.
Thereby, we could calculate all membrane potentials at time t þ Dt in each
segment, where Dt corresponds to the time step in the Euler method. The
time step, Dt, was ﬁxed at the value of 0.5 ms to compensate for the reduced
size of the discretized space and for the acute change in the membrane
potential due to the occurrence of the cleft potential. Transmembrane
stimuli with a basic cycle length of 400 ms were applied to the middle
lateral segment of the cell located at the ﬁber end. Each transmembrane
stimulus had duration of 0.5 ms and strength of 300 mA/cm2, which was
threefold higher than the diastolic threshold.

We deﬁned the activation time of each cell as the time when the cell
membrane depolarized and reached –30 mV from the resting potential.
Then, the CV was calculated based on the activation times of the 21st
and 42nd cells.

RESULTS

Effects of subcellular NaCh distribution
on AP waveform

Fig. 2, A and B, shows examples of the APs observed in the
middle LM segment of the 32nd cell in the noncleft and
cleft models, respectively, assuming that NaChs are only
localized at the pre- and post-JMs, i.e., 100%gNa,JM and
0%gNa,LM. The noncleft model exhibited typical AP wave-
form for ventricular myocytes (Fig. 2 A). The AP in the cleft
model, on the other hand, had smaller amplitude of phase-
0 and a larger phase-2 dome (Fig. 2 B). Details on the
phase-0 of
the regional membrane potentials in each
segment are shown in Fig. S1.

To investigate what effect the NaChs expressed in LM
had on the AP waveforms, we further conducted simulations
of AP propagation where NaChs were added to LM
(Fig. 2 C). Then, we found that as the %gNa,LM increased
step-by-step from 0% to 50% of the gNa, the APs became
similar to that in the noncleft model (compare to Fig. 2 A).

Modulations of CV by subcellular NaCh
distribution

The relationships between CV and the total NaCh conduc-

tance (%gNa,JMþLM ¼ %gNa,JM þ %gNa,LM) of the cell

membrane in the noncleft and cleft models are shown in
Fig. 3. This ﬁgure shows CVas a function of the %gNa,JMþLM
when the %gNa,LM varied independently.
Intriguingly,
CV in the noncleft model (Fig. 3 A) was only determined
by %gNa,JMþLM per cell, regardless of the subcellular NaCh
distribution, whereas CV in the cleft model was largely inﬂu-
enced by both %gNa,JMþLM and %gNa,LM. For instance, the
noncleft model with 0%gNa,LM still maintained AP

þ

Na

A

C

Channel Distribution and Conduction

557

B

A

B

FIGURE 2 AP waveforms observed at a myocardial cell in the strand
model. (A and B) AP waveforms in the noncleft and cleft models, respec-
tively, in the case of 100%gNa,JM with 0%gNa,LM. (C) AP waveforms in
the cleft models where the NaChs are ﬁxed at 100%gNa,JM with either
10%gNa,LM (left), 30%gNa,LM (middle), or 50%gNa,LM (right). In the strand
model, we employed 2.534 mS for the gap-junctional conductance (Gg) and
0.25 mS for the cleft conductance (Gj). The values %gNa,JM and %gNa,LM
indicate the NaCh conductances of junctional membrane (JM) and lateral
membrane (LM), respectively.

propagation when %gNa,JMþLM (equal to %gNa,JM in this
case) was reduced to 20%.

The critical CV just before conduction block was
14.0 cm/s in the case of 15%gNa,JMþLM, corresponding to
one-fourth of the CV in normal condition (56.2 cm/s
with 100%gNa,JMþLM). In contrast, the cleft model with
0%gNa,LM failed to propagate AP if %gNa,JMþLM (equal to
%gNa,JM) was reduced to <45% (Fig. 3 B), indicating that
the safety of AP propagation was more sensitive to the
changes in %gNa,JM than previously thought. Moreover,
the addition of NaChs to LM (compare 0%gNa,LM and
10%gNa,LM in Fig. 3 B) led to an increase in CV and
a decrease in the critical value of %gNa,JMþLM causing the
conduction block. These results suggest that NaChs in the
LM are important to keep the CV and to ensure the robust-
ness of AP propagation in the reduced %gNa,JM condition.

Effects of cleft conductance change on AP
propagation

We ﬁrst conﬁrmed a relationship between the CV and the Gj
in the cleft model with the condition that NaChs are only
localized in JM as reported previously (24). (Fig. 4 A,
left). If the Gg was sufﬁciently large, the CV decreased
monotonically as the Gj was reduced. By gradually reducing

FIGURE 3 Conduction velocity (CV) as a function of total NaCh
conductance (%gNa,JMþLM) by changing NaCh distribution within the cell
in the noncleft (A) and cleft (B) strand models. (Dashed line with the
open circles) AP propagation with a triangular AP waveform. For purpose
of comparison, experimental data (36) are plotted as open squares on panels
A and B. (Red and blue short horizontal bars) Threshold for conduction
block. In the models, we employed 2.534 mS for the gap-junctional conduc-
tance (Gg) and 0.25 mS for the cleft conductance (Gj).

the Gg, the relationship between the CV and the Gj shifted
from the monophasic to biphasic behavior. An increase in
the CV could be observed when the Gg was reduced to
<10% of normal Gg (<0.253 mS) and the Gj was reduced
to 0.5 mS, corresponding to the cleft width of ~30 nm.
Further decrease in the Gj from 0.32 to 0.125 mS caused
the reduction in CV from 14 to 7 cm/s. This result agreed
well with the simulation results shown by Kucera et al.
(24). In addition, we found that the AP resulted in an all-
or-none repolarization and loss of the AP plateau or dome
(Fig. 4 A, right) when the Gj was highly reduced (dashed
line with open circles in Fig. 4 A, left). Thus, in the cleft
model without NaChs in LM, an excessive reduction in
the Gj resulted in the marked abbreviation of the AP dura-
tion as well as in the conduction block.

In another series of simulation, the number of NaChs in
LM was gradually increased to examine what impact the
NaChs in LM had on AP propagation when the Gj was
varied. Fig. 4 B (left) shows CV as a function of Gj in the
cleft model with 100%gNa,JM and 0%gNa,LM. An almost
constant CV was maintained when the Gg was relatively
large and the Gj was decreased. Moreover, even if the Gj
was 0.1 mS, corresponding to the cleft width of 6 nm, the

Biophysical Journal 100(3) 554–563

558

A

B

FIGURE 4 Conduction velocity (CV) as a function of cleft conductance
(Gj) and AP waveforms in the case of 100%gNa,JM with 0%gNa,LM (A) and
in the case of 100%gNa,JM with 50%gNa,LM (B) in the cleft model. AP
waveform observed in the third segment of the 32nd cell where the cleft
conductance (Gj) was set to 0.17 mS (cleft width, w ¼ 10 nm) (A) and
0.1 mS (w ¼ 6 nm) (B), respectively, and the gap-junctional conductance
(Gg) was ﬁxed at 2.534 mS.

propagation with the appropriate AP waveform could
be maintained in the cleft model with 100%gNa,JM and
50%gNa,LM (Fig. 4 B, right). These results also suggest
that the NaChs in LM increase the robustness of AP propa-
gation under a variety of the Gj values.

AP propagation and gap-junctional conductance

Fig. 5 shows CV as a function of Gg between myocytes. As
expected, the CV in the noncleft model gradually dimin-
ished with the decrease in the Gg independent of the subcel-
lular NaCh distributions (Fig. 5 A). The critical value of Gg
just before conduction block was ~0.3% of the normal Gg,
at which the Gg was the same value as the intracellular
axial conductance (2.534 mS); thus, the critical CV was
0.36 cm/s. Similar to the case in the noncleft model, a mono-
tonic decrease in the CV was observed in the cleft model
with 100%gNa,JM and 0%gNa,LM as the Gg was decreased.
However, the slope of the CV-Gg curve of the 100%gNa,JM
case in the cleft model was more gentle and the CV at low
Gg was higher (~15 cm/s) than in the noncleft model
(compare the solid red line and the gray dashed line in
Fig. 5 B).

Furthermore, we conﬁrmed that even in the absence
the CV was maintained at
of gap-junctional coupling,
14.7 cm/s. For comparison, we investigated the effect of
the subcellular NaCh distribution on CV under the condition
that the total number of NaChs per cell was kept constant at

Biophysical Journal 100(3) 554–563

Tsumoto et al.

the control value of gNa. As shown in Fig. S2, not a decrease
in %gNa,JM but an increase in %gNa,LM resulted in the
steeper slope of the CV-Gg curve at low Gg. These results
indicate that localizing sufﬁcient NaChs to JM is required
to maintain CV when Gg is highly reduced.

In the cleft model with 100%gNa,JM and 0%gNa,LM, the
CV for normal Gg was no more than a half of that in the non-
cleft model. Adding NaChs to the LM increased the CV
under normal Gg. By increasing the NaChs to 50%gNa,LM,
the CV came close to the physiological range in the longitu-
dinal direction of ventricular myoﬁber (50–60 cm/s). A
reduction in Gg under the condition with 100%gNa,JM and
50%gNa,LM also resulted in decreased CV, but an abrupt
reduction in CV was observed when Gg was highly reduced
(black and purple lines, Fig. 5 B). In the case of the abrupt
reduction in CV, we observed the alternating pattern of long
and short conduction delays (Fig. 5, C–E), suggesting the
gap-junctional mechanism with the periodic and intermit-
tent dysfunction of the EF mechanism contributed to this
phenomenon.

To understand the mechanism of the slowing of AP prop-
agation, how the reduced Gg inﬂuences the cleft potential
between adjacent cells should be clariﬁed. The amplitude
of the gap-junctional current (Ig) reduced monotonically
as the Gg decreased (Fig. S3 A). In the cases of 100%gNa,JM
with 0–10%gNa,LM in the cleft model (red and blue lines in
Fig. S3 B), the minimal value of the cleft potential (Vj)
shifted more negatively as the Gg decreased. We conﬁrmed
in this study that such the marked negative cleft potential
resulted in the activation of NaChs of the post-JM and
thus resulted in the prevention of signiﬁcant conduction
delay (CV was kept at ~15 cm/s, as shown in Fig. 5 B)
due to the EF mechanism. In contrast, when the NaCh in
LM sufﬁciently increased (R30%gNa,LM), the cleft poten-
tial showed a signiﬁcant increase under the condition of
low Gg (see black and purple lines in Fig. S3 B) (this
mechanism is also discussed in the Supporting Material).
Such high cleft potential caused the reduction of the NaCh
in the post-JM (see black and purple lines in
current
Fig. S3 C) and the slow depolarization of the cell membrane
(see asterisks in Fig. 5, D and E), resulting in the slowing of
AP propagation.

p

ﬃﬃﬃ
2

p

ﬃﬃﬃ
2

mm in width and 100

Finally, we additionally conducted similar simulations
with larger cell size (22
mm in
length), of which surface membrane area was twice that of
the control cell. Then we found in the noncleft model with
100%gNa,JM and 0%gNa,LM that the larger cell size led to
the increase in CV (compare the dashed line and the solid
line in Fig. 6 A). In contrast, the CV in the cleft model
with 100%gNa,JM and 0%gNa,LM was reduced by the increase
in the cell size because the AP propagation via EF mecha-
nism was markedly inﬂuenced by the subcellular NaCh
distribution (Fig. 6 B). However, by adding the NaChs to
the LM in the cleft model with 100%gNa,JM and 50%gNa,LM
(Fig. 6 C), the relationship between the CV and the cell size

þ

Na

A

B

Channel Distribution and Conduction

559

C

D

E

FIGURE 5 Conduction velocity (CV) as a function of gap-junctional conductance (Gg) in the noncleft (A) and cleft (B) strand models and change in qual-
itative properties of AP propagation observed in the case of 100%gNa,JM with 50%gNa,LM in the cleft model when the gap-junctional conductance (Gg) is
decreased (C–E). For comparison, the dashed line in panel B represents the CV in the case of 100%gNa,JM with 0%gNa,LM in the noncleft model (red line
in panel A). (C–E) The AP waveforms (left) and the enlarged diagrams at the phase-0 of APs (right), respectively. In the cleft model, we ﬁxed the cleft
conductance (Gj) at 0.25 mS, corresponding to the cleft width of 15 nm.

was quite similar to that in the noncleft model (compare to
Fig. 6 A).

DISCUSSION

A number of theoretical studies previously investigated the
nature of AP propagation in myoﬁber. For example, Spere-

A

B

C

lakis and co-workers (18,19) proposed the EF mechanism as
a mechanism of AP propagation without gap-junctional
coupling, and they demonstrated that the AP could propa-
gate from cell to cell via the EF mechanism alone. Kucera
et al. (24) raised the possibility that when NaChs were
localized at JM, the EF mechanism contributes to AP prop-
agation together with gap-junctional mechanism. Mori et al.

FIGURE 6 Effect of cell size on conduction
velocity (CV) in the noncleft (A) and cleft (B and
C) myoﬁber models. CV as a function of gap junc-
tional conductance (gg) in the noncleft (A) and cleft
(B) models with 100%gNa,JM and 0%gNa,LM, and in
the cleft model (C) with 100%gNa,JM and 50%
gNa,LM. (Dashed and solid lines) gg-CV relation-
ship curve in the normal cell size case (100 mm
ﬃﬃﬃ
p
in length and 22 mm in width) and that in the larger
cell size case (100
2
mm
in width), respectively. In the larger cell, the total
surface membrane area in a cell, Stotal, was twice
that of the normal cell. In this simulation, we
assumed that the gg at the JM in the larger cell
was equal to that in the normal cell. For purpose
of comparison, experimental data (16) are plotted
as open squares on panels A–C.

ﬃﬃﬃ
p
mm in length and 22
2

Biophysical Journal 100(3) 554–563

560

Tsumoto et al.

(33) evaluated the effect of the intercellular cleft conduc-
tance on CV.

These theoretical studies mainly focused on the micro-
structural characteristics of intercellular cleft in the myoﬁber,
and on the role of EF mechanism under physiological condi-
tion. On the other hand, our objective of this study was to
clarify the roles of the subcellular NaCh distribution in AP
propagation. In particular, we focused on the role of NaChs
of the LM in AP propagation under the existence of EF
mechanism. Then we found that the NaChs in the LM were
responsible for both increasing CV and ensuring the robust-
ness of AP propagation under conditions of low gap-junc-
tional coupling. Based on these results, we concluded that
the NaChs in the LM might be important for the homeostatic
excitation propagation in both the physiological and patho-
logical conditions.

AP propagation based on EF mechanism

To elucidate whether AP propagation depends only on the
gap-junctional mechanism (Fig. 1 C), we ﬁrst investigated
the relationship between the subcellular NaCh distribution
and the CV. Fig. 3 A demonstrates that the CV in the noncleft
model is only determined by the total number of NaChs per
cell independent of the number of NaChs expressed in LM.
Spach et al. (25) also numerically conﬁrmed that the alter-
ation of subcellular NaCh distribution had no signiﬁcant
effect on the CV. However, in this study, when we incorpo-
rated the detailed microstructures of myoﬁber (such as
cleft between cells and intercalated disk) into the model
(Fig. 1 B), the subcellular NaCh distribution had surprising
effects on AP propagation. The roles of such microstruc-
tures on AP propagation can be explained by the EF mech-
anism (18,19), together with the gap-junctional mechanism.

Subcellular NaCh distribution and AP waveform

The subcellular NaCh distribution in the cleft model altered
the AP waveform (Figs. 2 and 4). When all NaChs were local-
ized to JM, the AP waveform differed from the typically
observed one in the ventricular epicardial single myocyte
(34,35). The reason for this might be explained as follows.
The alteration of the cleft potential based on the EF mecha-
nism gave rise to the decrease in the driving force of the
NaCh current in the post-JM (24). The decrease in the poten-
tial difference between the pre- and post-JMs due to the
simultaneous supra-threshold depolarization of their JMs
(see Fig. S1 A) reduced the current ﬂowing through the gap
junction. The intracellular axial current, consisting of both
the gap-junctional current and the inward NaCh current in
the post-JM, commonly depolarizes the local membrane
(i.e., the LM segments) and generates an axial current to
act on the pre-JM of the adjacent cell. Therefore, the intracel-
lular axial current was reduced and this could not provide
sufﬁcient current to depolarize the adjacent cell.

Biophysical Journal 100(3) 554–563

Another reason for the reduction in the intracellular axial
current
is the high cleft resistance, resulting from the
extremely narrow clefts. Such high cleft resistance induced
the large negative extracellular potential and at the same
time prevented the inﬂux of NaCh current from the extracel-
lular cleft space. Therefore, the phase-0 amplitude in AP
decreased (Figs. 2 B and 4 A, right). On the other hand,
the inward NaCh current at the LM boosted the local current
and increased the intracellular axial current, causing the
sufﬁcient depolarization of the LM. Thereby, the normal
AP in ventricular myocyte was formed (Figs. 2 C and 4 B,
right).

Modulation of AP propagation by subcellular
NaCh distribution

A previous experimental study (36) reported that the CV in
the Scn5a heterozygous young mice, of which NaCh
conductance was 50% of the control value (37), led to the
decrease in CV by 16.9% (from 36.2 to 30.1 cm/s). As
shown in Fig. 3 A,
the half-NaCh conductance (50%
gNa,JMþLM) in the noncleft model caused the decrease in
CV by 23.4% (from 54.3 to 41.6 cm/s), of which value
was much larger than that in the experimental study (36).
Such discrepancy between the experimental and simulation
studies can be reduced by the use of the cleft model, which
can reproduce the realistic AP propagation through both the
gap-junctional and EF mechanisms. As shown in Fig. 3 B,
when 10% of the gNa was expressed at LM, the half-NaCh
conductance resulted in the decrease in CV by 17.2%
(from 37.7 to 31.2 cm/s), corresponding to the aforemen-
tioned experimental data (36).

The changes in CV in response to Gg suggest that the
NaChs located at JM and LM play different roles in the
modulation of CV. As shown in Fig. 5, A and B, the CV in
the cleft model was less sensitive to Gg than in the noncleft
model. Furthermore, we found that the addition of NaChs to
LM increased the sensitivity of the CV to Gg in the cleft
model. To conﬁrm whether this characteristic response
resulted from the increase in total NaCh number or the
change in NaCh distribution itself, we conducted additional
simulations, Fig. S2, and found that the tendency was essen-
tially the same as Fig. 5 B. Therefore, we can conclude
that the NaChs in LM compensate for the slowing CV by
a decrease in Gg via the EF mechanism. Comparing with
Fig. 5 B and Fig. S2, we additionally found that
this
compensation was stronger when the NaChs were abundant
in JM (intercalated disk). This result was in agreement with
the simulation results obtained by Kucera et al. (24).

Our results may explain the reduced CV in Cx43 CKO
mice. Because the Gg in Cx43 CKO mice is decreased
to <10% of the Gg in wild-type (17), the CV is expected to
be approximately one-third of the wild-type, according to
the cable theory (38). However, the actual CV measured
by Gutstein et al. (16) was approximately half of that of

þ

Na

Channel Distribution and Conduction

wild-type within either the longitudinal or the transversal
directions of the myoﬁber. In fact, in this study, the CV
was decreased to approximately one-half and approximately
one-third of the control value in the cleft and noncleft
models, respectively (Fig. 5 B). Therefore, in an actual
myocardial tissue, the EF mechanism could serve to prevent
the reduction of the CV by the decrease in Gg.

If all NaChs locating in JM is the case, the CV would be
kept at 15 cm/s even without gap-junctional current, i.e.,

Gg ¼ 0 mS (Fig. 5 B). However, Beauchamp et al. (39)

demonstrated that the conduction block occurred by both
the knockout of Cx43 and the pharmacological block of
Cx45, and they concluded that the EF mechanism does
not contribute to the mechanism of AP propagation. As
shown in this simulation study, when sufﬁcient NaChs are
expressed in LM (>30%gNa,LM) in the cleft model, the
contribution of EF mechanism decreased due to a reduction
of the cleft potential amplitude (Fig. S3 B) and thus the
conduction block could be reproduced (black and purple
lines in Fig. 5 B). Therefore, the results of our study suggest
the possibility, without conﬂicting with Beauchamp et al.
(39), that the EF mechanism can contribute to the AP
propagation.

Effect of cell size on AP propagation

Previous studies (25,40–42) have shown that AP propaga-
tion in cardiac tissues under the physiological and/or patho-
physiological conditions was highly inﬂuenced by both size
and shape of the myocardial cells. As shown in Fig. 6 B, the
localization of NaCh to the JM in the cleft model led to an
inverse effect of the increase in cell size on the CV in
contrast with the noncleft model. This is due to both the
reduction in the number of NaChs of JM and the reduction
in LM excitability. However, in the same cleft model but
with the addition of NaChs to LM, the CV in the myoﬁber
composed of larger cells was higher than that in the case
of normal cell size (Fig. 6 C). This result further supports
our ﬁnding that the presence of NaChs in LM plays an
important role in the AP propagation. Nevertheless, further
studies will be required because the effect of the cell size on
AP propagation in the cleft model is far more complicated
than that in the noncleft model.

Limitations of the model

þ

þ

-Ca2þ

/K

-ATPase) (45), and Na

In addition to the localization of NaCh to the JM, other ion
channel and transporter proteins are also distributed in the
JM, such as voltage-gated Kþ channels (43,44), Na
þ
þ
pump (Na
exchanger
(46). However, we did not take into account the localization
of their ion channels and transporters to the JM. Such ion
channels and transporters might have some effects on CV
via the change of ion concentration in the intercellular cleft
space (33).

561

Physiological implications

The existence of NaCh at LM was experimentally conﬁrmed
by several studies (20–23). However, the role of NaChs at
LM is still controversial. Maier et al. (21) stated the possi-
bility that the NaChs at transverse tubule (LM segment)
make the myocyte more excitable, thereby strengthening
the contraction via excitation-contraction coupling. On the
other hand, Brette and Orchard (47) reported that NaChs
at transverse tubule did not change the calcium transient
and therefore the NaChs had no effect on excitation-contrac-
tion coupling. In this study, we found, to our knowledge,
a novel role of NaChs at LM in increasing the robustness
of the AP propagation. Our simulations clearly showed
that the NaChs in the LM act as a booster for the intracel-
lular axial current. Furthermore, in order for the EF mecha-
nism (cleft model) to coexist with a normal prediction of the
physiological AP waveform (compare Fig. 2, B and C), the
existence of NaChs at LM is indispensable. From the point
of view of CV, the NaChs at LM are necessary for the cleft
model to reproduce the physiological CV at ~60 cm/s in the
longitudinal direction of the myoﬁber.

Clinical implications

The APs with insufﬁcient depolarization from phase-0 to
phase-2 of the AP (Fig. 2 B) and with a marked abbreviation
of the AP duration (Fig. 4 A, right) by the decrease of NaChs
in the LM evoke the change of AP morphology commonly
observed in patients with the Brugada syndrome (48,49).
In fact, Mohler et al. (22) and Lowe et al. (50) have sug-
gested the possibility that gene mutation in ankyrin-binding
motif of the NaCh causing the decrease of NaChs at cell
membrane in ventricular myocytes was associated with Bru-
gada syndrome.
Furthermore,

immunohistochemical staining by Baba
et al. (23) revealed that NaChs of myocytes in the infarct-
border zone are localized in intercalated disk (JM) rather
than in LM, whereas those in the normal zone are homoge-
neously distributed throughout the entire cell membrane.
Based on the results of this study, such inhomogeneous
change in NaCh distribution (the decrease of NaChs in
LM) could avoid conduction block at low Gg condition
produced by ischemia (compare purple line and red line
in Fig. 5 B), resulting in the homeostasis of AP propagation.
This also implies that the NaCh blockade (class I antiar-
rhythmic drug) in the ischemic myocardium might cause
conduction block (Fig. 3 B), leading to a more arrhythmo-
genic condition.

SUPPORTING MATERIAL

Additional methods with ﬁve equations, additional results, one table,
and three ﬁgures are available at http://www.biophysj.org/biophysj/
supplemental/S0006-3495(10)05262-8.

Biophysical Journal 100(3) 554–563

562

Tsumoto et al.

The authors thank Dr. Rachid Ait-Haddou and Prof. Taishin Nomura for
their useful comments.

This study was supported by the Global COE Program ‘‘in silico medicine’’
at Osaka University; the Institute of Seizon and Life Science; and Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (Grant-in-
Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on Innovative Areas No. 22136002).

REFERENCES

1. Ru¨disu¨li, A., and R. Weingart. 1989. Electrical properties of gap junc-
tion channels in guinea-pig ventricular cell pairs revealed by exposure
to heptanol. Pﬂugers Arch. 415:12–21.

2. de Groot, J. R., T. Veenstra, ., E. E. Verheijck. 2003. Conduction
slowing by the gap junctional uncoupler carbenoxolone. Cardiovasc.
Res. 60:288–297.

3. Kle´ber, A. G., C. B. Riegger, and M. J. Janse. 1987. Electrical uncou-
pling and increase of extracellular resistance after induction of
ischemia in isolated, arterially perfused rabbit papillary muscle. Circ.
Res. 61:271–279.

4. Kieval, R. S., J. F. Spear, and E. N. Moore. 1992. Gap junctional
conductance in ventricular myocyte pairs isolated from postischemic
rabbit myocardium. Circ. Res. 71:127–136.

5. Hoyt, R. H., M. L. Cohen, and J. E. Safﬁtz. 1989. Distribution and
three-dimensional structure of intercellular junctions in canine myocar-
dium. Circ. Res. 64:563–574.

6. Smith, J. H., C. R. Green, ., N. J. Severs. 1991. Altered patterns of gap
junction distribution in ischemic heart disease. An immunohistochem-
ical study of human myocardium using laser scanning confocal micros-
copy. Am. J. Pathol. 139:801–821.

7. Yeager, M. 1998. Structure of cardiac gap junction intercellular chan-

nels. J. Struct. Biol. 121:231–245.

8. Cooklin, M., W. R. J. Wallis, ., C. H. Fry. 1997. Changes in cell-to-
cell electrical coupling associated with left ventricular hypertrophy.
Circ. Res. 80:765–771.

9. Poelzing, S., and D. S. Rosenbaum. 2004. Altered connexin43 expres-
sion produces arrhythmia substrate in heart failure. Am. J. Physiol.
Heart Circ. Physiol. 287:H1762–H1770.

10. Spragg, D. D., F. G. Akar, ., D. A. Kass. 2005. Abnormal conduction
and repolarization in late-activated myocardium of dyssynchronously
contracting hearts. Cardiovasc. Res. 67:77–86.

11. Spach, M. S., W. T. Miller, 3rd, ., E. A. Johnson. 1981. The discon-
tinuous nature of propagation in normal canine cardiac muscle.
Evidence for recurrent discontinuities of intracellular resistance that
affect the membrane currents. Circ. Res. 48:39–54.

12. Rudy, Y., and W. L. Quan. 1987. A model study of the effects of the
discrete cellular structure on electrical propagation in cardiac tissue.
Circ. Res. 61:815–823.

13. Shaw, R. M., and Y. Rudy. 1997. Ionic mechanisms of propagation in
cardiac tissue. Roles of the sodium and L-type calcium currents during
reduced excitability and decreased gap junction coupling. Circ. Res.
81:727–741.

14. Ya, J., E. B. Erdtsieck-Ernste, ., W. H. Lamers. 1998. Heart defects in

connexin43-deﬁcient mice. Circ. Res. 82:360–366.

15. Morley, G. E., D. Vaidya, ., J. Jalife. 1999. Characterization of
conduction in the ventricles of normal and heterozygous Cx43
knockout mice using optical mapping. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol.
10:1361–1375.

16. Gutstein, D. E., G. E. Morley, ., G. I. Fishman. 2001. Conduction
slowing and sudden arrhythmic death in mice with cardiac-restricted
inactivation of connexin43. Circ. Res. 88:333–339.

17. Yao, J. A., D. E. Gutstein, ., A. L. Wit. 2003. Cell coupling between
ventricular myocyte pairs from connexin43-deﬁcient murine hearts.
Circ. Res. 93:736–743.

18. Sperelakis, N., and J. E. Mann, Jr. 1977. Evaluation of electric ﬁeld
changes in the cleft between excitable cells. J. Theor. Biol. 64:71–96.

Biophysical Journal 100(3) 554–563

19. Sperelakis, N., and K. McConnell. 2002. Electric ﬁeld interactions
between closely abutting excitable cells. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag.
21:77–89.

20. Cohen, S. A. 1996. Immunocytochemical localization of rH1 sodium
channel in adult rat heart atria and ventricle. Presence in terminal inter-
calated disks. Circulation. 94:3083–3086.

21. Maier, S. K. G., R. E. Westenbroek, ., W. A. Catterall. 2002. An unex-
pected role for brain-type sodium channels in coupling of cell surface
depolarization to contraction in the heart. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
99:4073–4078.

22. Mohler, P. J., I. Rivolta, ., V. Bennett. 2004. Nav1.5 E1053K mutation
causing Brugada syndrome blocks binding to ankyrin-G and expression
of Nav1.5 on the surface of cardiomyocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 101:17533–17538.

23. Baba, S., W. Dun, ., P. A. Boyden. 2005. Remodeling in cells from
different regions of the reentrant circuit during ventricular tachycardia.
Circulation. 112:2386–2396.

24. Kucera, J. P., S. Rohr, and Y. Rudy. 2002. Localization of sodium
channels in intercalated disks modulates cardiac conduction. Circ.
Res. 91:1176–1182.

25. Spach, M. S., J. F. Heidlage, ., R. C. Barr. 2000. Electrophysiological
effects of remodeling cardiac gap junctions and cell size: experimental
and model studies of normal cardiac growth. Circ. Res. 86:302–311.

26. Severs, N. J. 1995. Cardiac muscle cell interaction: from microanatomy
to the molecular make-up of the gap junction. Histol. Histopathol.
10:481–501.

27. Katz, B. 1966. Nerve, Muscle and Synapse. McGraw-Hill, New York.
28. Suzuki, S., S. Murakami, ., Y. Kurachi. 2008. In silico risk assessment
for drug-induction of cardiac arrhythmia. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol.
98:52–60.

29. Findlay, I., S. Suzuki, ., Y. Kurachi. 2008. Physiological modulation
of voltage-dependent inactivation in the cardiac muscle L-type calcium
channel: a modeling study. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 96:482–498.

30. Luo, C. H., and Y. Rudy. 1994. A dynamic model of the cardiac ventric-
ular action potential. I. Simulations of ionic currents and concentration
changes. Circ. Res. 74:1071–1096.

31. Faber, G. M., and Y. Rudy. 2000. Action potential and contractility
]i overloaded cardiac myocytes: a simulation study.

þ
changes in [Na
Biophys. J. 78:2392–2404.

32. Aiba, T., W. Shimizu, ., K. Sunagawa. 2005. Cellular and ionic mech-
anism for drug-induced long QT syndrome and effectiveness of verap-
amil. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 45:300–307.

33. Mori, Y., G. I. Fishman, and C. S. Peskin. 2008. Ephaptic conduction in
a cardiac strand model with 3D electrodiffusion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 105:6463–6468.

34. Osaka, T., I. Kodama, ., K. Yamada. 1987. Effects of activation
sequence and anisotropic cellular geometry on the repolarization
phase of action potential of dog ventricular muscles. Circulation.
76:226–236.

35. Aiba, T., W. Shimizu, ., K. Sunagawa. 2003. Transmural heteroge-
neity of the action potential conﬁguration in the feline left ventricle.
Circ. J. 67:449–454.

36. van Veen, T. A. B., M. Stein, ., H. V. van Rijen. 2005. Impaired
impulse propagation in Scn5a-knockout mice: combined contribution
of excitability, connexin expression, and tissue architecture in relation
to aging. Circulation. 112:1927–1935.

37. Papadatos, G. A., P. M. R. Wallerstein, ., A. A. Grace. 2002. Slowed
conduction and ventricular tachycardia after targeted disruption of the
cardiac sodium channel gene Scn5a. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
99:6210–6215.

38. Arnsdorf, M. F., and J. C. Makielski. 2001. Excitability and impulse
In Heart Physiology and Pathophysiology, 4th Ed.
propagation.
Y. Kurachi, A. Terzic, M. V. Cohen, and N. Sperelakis, editors. Califor-
nia Academic Press, Millbrae, CA. 99–132.

þ

Na

Channel Distribution and Conduction

39. Beauchamp, P., C. Choby, ., A. G. Kle´ber. 2004. Electrical propaga-
tion in synthetic ventricular myocyte strands from germline con-
nexin43 knockout mice. Circ. Res. 95:170–178.

40. Joyner, R. W. 1982. Effects of the discrete pattern of electrical coupling
on propagation through an electrical syncytium. Circ. Res. 50:192–200.

41. Kucera, J. P., and Y. Rudy. 2001. Mechanistic insights into very slow
conduction in branching cardiac tissue: a model study. Circ. Res.
89:799–806.

42. Satoh, H., L. M. D. Delbridge, ., D. M. Bers. 1996. Surface/volume
relationship in cardiac myocytes studied with confocal microscopy
and membrane capacitance measurements: species-dependence and
developmental effects. Biophys. J. 70:1494–1504.

43. Barry, D. M., J. S. Trimmer, ., J. M. Nerbonne. 1995. Differential
channel subunits in adult rat heart.

þ

expression of voltage-gated K
Relation to functional K

þ

channels? Circ. Res. 77:361–369.

44. Mays, D. J., J. M. Foose, ., M. M. Tamkun. 1995. Localization of the
channel protein in explanted cardiac tissue. J. Clin. Invest.

þ

Kv1.5 K
96:282–292.

563

45. McDonough, A. A., Y. Zhang, ., J. S. Frank. 1996. Subcellular distri-
bution of sodium pump isoform subunits in mammalian cardiac myo-
cytes. Am. J. Physiol. 270:C1221–C1227.

46. Kieval, R. S., R. J. Bloch, ., W. J. Lederer. 1992. Immunoﬂuorescence
localization of the Na-Ca exchanger in heart cells. Am. J. Physiol.
263:C545–C550.

47. Brette, F., and C. H. Orchard. 2006. No apparent requirement for
neuronal sodium channels in excitation-contraction coupling in rat
ventricular myocytes. Circ. Res. 98:667–674.

48. Brugada, P., and J. Brugada. 1992. Right bundle branch block, persis-
tent ST segment elevation and sudden cardiac death: a distinct clinical
and electrocardiographic syndrome. A multicenter report. J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol. 20:1391–1396.

49. Kurita, T., W. Shimizu, ., Y. Kosakai. 2002. The electrophysiologic
mechanism of ST-segment elevation in Brugada syndrome. J. Am.
Coll. Cardiol. 40:330–334.

50. Lowe, J. S., O. Palygin, ., P. J. Mohler. 2008. Voltage-gated Nav
channel targeting in the heart requires an ankyrin-G dependent cellular
pathway. J. Cell Biol. 180:173–186.

Biophysical Journal 100(3) 554–563

