1. J Comput Neurosci. 2012 Jun;32(3):499-519. doi: 10.1007/s10827-011-0366-4. Epub
2011 Oct 5.

Relative contributions of local cell and passing fiber activation and silencing
to changes in thalamic fidelity during deep brain stimulation and lesioning: a
computational modeling study.

So RQ(1), Kent AR, Grill WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Box 90281, Durham, NC
27708-0281, USA.

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) and lesioning are two surgical techniques used in
the treatment of advanced Parkinson's disease (PD) in patients whose symptoms are
not well controlled by drugs, or who experience dyskinesias as a side effect of
medications. Although these treatments have been widely practiced, the mechanisms
behind DBS and lesioning are still not well understood. The subthalamic nucleus
(STN) and globus pallidus pars interna (GPi) are two common targets for both DBS 
and lesioning. Previous studies have indicated that DBS not only affects local
cells within the target, but also passing axons within neighboring regions. Using
a computational model of the basal ganglia-thalamic network, we studied the
relative contributions of activation and silencing of local cells (LCs) and
fibers of passage (FOPs) to changes in the accuracy of information transmission
through the thalamus (thalamic fidelity), which is correlated with the
effectiveness of DBS. Activation of both LCs and FOPs during STN and GPi-DBS were
beneficial to the outcome of stimulation. During STN and GPi lesioning, effects
of silencing LCs and FOPs were different between the two types of lesioning. For 
STN lesioning, silencing GPi FOPs mainly contributed to its effectiveness, while 
silencing only STN LCs did not improve thalamic fidelity. In contrast, silencing 
both GPi LCs and GPe FOPs during GPi lesioning contributed to improvements in
thalamic fidelity. Thus, two distinct mechanisms produced comparable improvements
in thalamic function: driving the output of the basal ganglia to produce tonic
inhibition and silencing the output of the basal ganglia to produce tonic
disinhibition. These results show the importance of considering effects of
activating or silencing fibers passing close to the nucleus when deciding upon a 
target location for DBS or lesioning.

PMCID: PMC3288232
PMID: 21984318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]