1. PLoS One. 2007 Oct 3;2(10):e983.

Investigating the role of islet cytoarchitecture in its oscillation using a new
beta-cell cluster model.

Nittala A(1), Ghosh S, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Max McGee National Research Center for Juvenile Diabetes, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.

The oscillatory insulin release is fundamental to normal glycemic control. The
basis of the oscillation is the intercellular coupling and bursting
synchronization of beta cells in each islet. The functional role of islet beta
cell mass organization with respect to its oscillatory bursting is not well
understood. This is of special interest in view of the recent finding of islet
cytoarchitectural differences between human and animal models. In this study we
developed a new hexagonal closest packing (HCP) cell cluster model. The model
captures more accurately the real islet cell organization than the simple cubic
packing (SCP) cluster that is conventionally used. Using our new model we
investigated the functional characteristics of beta-cell clusters, including the 
fraction of cells able to burst f(b), the synchronization index lambda of the
bursting beta cells, the bursting period T(b), the plateau fraction p(f), and the
amplitude of intracellular calcium oscillation [Ca]. We determined their
dependence on cluster architectural parameters including number of cells n(beta),
number of inter-beta cell couplings of each beta cell n(c), and the coupling
strength g(c). We found that at low values of n(beta), n(c) and g(c), the
oscillation regularity improves with their increasing values. This functional
gain plateaus around their physiological values in real islets, at n(beta)
approximately 100, n(c) approximately 6 and g(c) approximately 200 pS. In
addition, normal beta-cell clusters are robust against significant perturbation
to their architecture, including the presence of non-beta cells or dead beta
cells. In clusters with n(beta)> approximately 100, coordinated beta-cell
bursting can be maintained at up to 70% of beta-cell loss, which is consistent
with laboratory and clinical findings of islets. Our results suggest that the
bursting characteristics of a beta-cell cluster depend quantitatively on its
architecture in a non-linear fashion. These findings are important to understand 
the islet bursting phenomenon and the regulation of insulin secretion, under both
physiological and pathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC1991600
PMID: 17912360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]