1. Circ J. 2011;75(1):80-8. Epub 2010 Nov 16.

Transmural dispersion of repolarization determines scroll wave behavior during
ventricular tachyarrhythmias.

Haraguchi R(1), Ashihara T, Namba T, Tsumoto K, Murakami S, Kurachi Y, Ikeda T,
Nakazawa K.

Author information: 
(1)National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Suita, Japan. 
haraguch@ri.ncvc.go.jp

Comment in
    Circ J. 2011;75(1):49-50.

BACKGROUND: Ventricular tachyarrhythmia is the leading cause of sudden cardiac
death, and scroll wave re-entry is known to underlie this condition. Class III
antiarrhythmic drugs are commonly used worldwide to treat ventricular
tachyarrhythmias; however, these drugs have a proarrhythmic adverse effect and
can cause Torsade de Pointes or ventricular fibrillation. Transmural dispersion
of repolarization (TDR) has been suggested to be a strong indicator of
ventricular tachyarrhythmia induction. However, the role of TDR during sustained 
scroll wave re-entry is poorly understood. The purpose of the present study was
to investigate how TDR affects scroll wave behavior and to provide a novel
analysis of the mechanisms that sustain tachyarrhythmias, using computer
simulations.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Computer simulations were carried out to quantify the TDR
and QT interval under a variety of I(Ks) and I(Kr) during transmural conduction. 
Simulated scroll wave re-entries were done under a variety of I(Ks) and I(Kr) in 
a ventricular wall slab model, and the scroll wave behavior and the filament
dynamics (3-dimensional organizing center) were analyzed. A slight increase in
TDR, but not in the QT interval, reflected antiarrhythmic properties resulting
from the restraint of scroll wave breakup, whereas a marked increase in TDR was
proarrhythmic, as a result of scroll wave breakup.
CONCLUSIONS: The TDR determines the sustainment of ventricular tachyarrhythmias, 
through control of the scroll wave filament dynamics.

PMID: 21099125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]