1. J Neurophysiol. 2003 Feb;89(2):909-21.

Fast rhythmic bursting can be induced in layer 2/3 cortical neurons by enhancing 
persistent Na+ conductance or by blocking BK channels.

Traub RD(1), Buhl EH, Gloveli T, Whittington MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, State University of New York Health
Science Center, Brooklyn, New York 11203, USA. roger.traub@downstate.edu

Fast rhythmic bursting (or "chattering") is a firing pattern exhibited by
selected neocortical neurons in cats in vivo and in slices of adult ferret and
cat brain. Fast rhythmic bursting (FRB) has been recorded in certain superficial 
and deep principal neurons and in aspiny presumed local circuit neurons; it can
be evoked by depolarizing currents or by sensory stimulation and has been
proposed to depend on a persistent g(Na) that causes spike depolarizing
afterpotentials. We constructed a multicompartment 11-conductance model of a
layer 2/3 pyramidal neuron, containing apical dendritic calcium-mediated
electrogenesis; the model can switch between rhythmic spiking (RS) and FRB modes 
of firing, with various parameter changes. FRB in this model is favored by
enhancing persistent g(Na) and also by measures that reduce [Ca(2+)](i) or that
reduce the conductance of g(K(C)) (a fast voltage- and Ca(2+)-dependent
conductance). Axonal excitability plays a critical role in generating fast bursts
in the model. In vitro experiments in rat layer 2/3 neurons confirmed (as shown
previously by others) that RS firing could be switched to fast rhythmic bursting,
either by buffering [Ca(2+)](i) or by enhancing persistent g(Na). In addition,
our experiments confirmed the model prediction that reducing g(KC) (with
iberiotoxin) would favor FRB. During the bursts, fast prepotentials (spikelets)
could occur that did not originate in apical dendrites and that appear to derive 
from the axon. We suggest that modulator-induced regulation of [Ca(2+)] dynamics 
or of BK channel conductance, for example via protein kinase A, could play a role
in determining the firing pattern of neocortical neurons; specifically, such
modulation could play a role in regulating whether neurons respond to strong
stimulation with fast rhythmic bursts.

PMID: 12574468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]