1. J Comput Neurosci. 2004 May-Jun;16(3):211-35.

High frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus eliminates pathological
thalamic rhythmicity in a computational model.

Rubin JE(1), Terman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) or the internal
segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) has recently been recognized as an important
form of intervention for alleviating motor symptoms associated with Parkinson's
disease, but the mechanism underlying its effectiveness remains unknown. Using a 
computational model, this paper considers the hypothesis that DBS works by
replacing pathologically rhythmic basal ganglia output with tonic, high frequency
firing. In our simulations of parkinsonian conditions, rhythmic inhibition from
GPi to the thalamus compromises the ability of thalamocortical relay (TC) cells
to respond to depolarizing inputs, such as sensorimotor signals. High frequency
stimulation of STN regularizes GPi firing, and this restores TC responsiveness,
despite the increased frequency and amplitude of GPi inhibition to thalamus that 
result. We provide a mathematical phase plane analysis of the mechanisms that
determine TC relay capabilities in normal, parkinsonian, and DBS states in a
reduced model. This analysis highlights the differences in deinactivation of the 
low-threshold calcium T -current that we observe in TC cells in these different
conditions. Alternative scenarios involving convergence of thalamic signals in
the cortex are also discussed, and predictions associated with these results,
including the occurrence of rhythmic rebound bursts in certain TC cells in
parkinsonian states and their drastic reduction by DBS, are stated. These results
demonstrate how DBS could work by increasing firing rates of target cells, rather
than shutting them down.

Copyright 2004 Kluwer Academic Publishers

PMID: 15114047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]