1. J Physiol. 2006 Dec 1;577(Pt 2):617-39. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Modelling spinal circuitry involved in locomotor pattern generation: insights
from deletions during fictive locomotion.

Rybak IA(1), Shevtsova NA, Lafreniere-Roula M, McCrea DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19129, USA.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2007 Apr 15;580(Pt. 2):363-4.

The mammalian spinal cord contains a locomotor central pattern generator (CPG)
that can produce alternating rhythmic activity of flexor and extensor
motoneurones in the absence of rhythmic input and proprioceptive feedback. During
such fictive locomotor activity in decerebrate cats, spontaneous omissions of
activity occur simultaneously in multiple agonist motoneurone pools for a number 
of cycles. During these 'deletions', antagonist motoneurone pools usually become 
tonically active but may also continue to be rhythmic. The rhythmic activity that
re-emerges following a deletion is often not phase shifted. This suggests that
some neuronal mechanism can maintain the locomotor period when motoneurone
activity fails. To account for these observations, a simplified computational
model of the spinal circuitry has been developed in which the locomotor CPG
consists of two levels: a half-centre rhythm generator (RG) and a pattern
formation (PF) network, with reciprocal inhibitory interactions between
antagonist neural populations at each level. The model represents a network of
interacting neural populations with single interneurones and motoneurones
described in the Hodgkin-Huxley style. The model reproduces the range of
locomotor periods and phase durations observed during real locomotion in adult
cats and permits independent control of the level of motoneurone activity and of 
step cycle timing. By altering the excitability of neural populations within the 
PF network, the model can reproduce deletions in which motoneurone activity fails
but the phase of locomotor oscillations is maintained. The model also suggests
criteria for the functional identification of spinal interneurones involved in
the mammalian locomotor pattern generation.

PMCID: PMC1890439
PMID: 17008376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]