1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):H660-9. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Frequency-dependent effects of various IKr blockers on cardiac action potential
duration in a human atrial model.

Tsujimae K(1), Suzuki S, Murakami S, Kurachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology,
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.

Rapidly activating K(+) current (I(Kr)) blockers prolong action potential (AP)
duration (APD) in a reverse-frequency-dependent manner and may induce
arrhythmias, including torsade de pointes in the ventricle. The I(Kr) blocker
dofetilide has been approved for treatment of atrial arrhythmias, including
fibrillation. There are, however, a limited number of studies on the action of
I(Kr) blockers on atrial AP. When we tested a mathematical model of the human
atrial AP (M Courtemanche, RJ Ramirez, S Nattel. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 
275: H301-H321, 1998) to examine the effects of dofetilide-type I(Kr) blockade,
this model could not reproduce the reverse-frequency-dependent nature of I(Kr)
blockade on atrial APD. We modified the model by introducing a slowly activating 
K(+) current activation parameter. As the slow time constant was increased,
dofetilide-type blockade induced more prominent reverse-frequency-dependent APD
prolongation. Using the modified model, we also examined the effects of two more 
types of I(Kr) blockade similar to those of quinidine and vesnarinone. Voltage-
and time-dependent block of I(Kr) through the onset of inhibition by quinidine is
much faster than by vesnarinone. When we incorporated the kinetics of the effects
of these drugs on I(Kr) into the model, we found that quinidine-type blockade
caused a reverse-frequency-dependent prolongation of APD that was similar to the 
effect of dofetilide-type blockade, whereas vesnarinone-type blockade did not.
This finding coincides with experimental observations. The lack of the reverse
frequency dependence in vesnarinone-type blockade was accounted for by the slow
development of I(Kr) blockade at depolarized potentials. These results suggest
that the voltage- and time-dependent nature of I(Kr) blockade by drugs may be
critical for the phenotype of the drug effect on atrial AP.

PMID: 17220183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]