1. Circ Res. 1998 Jun 15;82(11):1206-23.

Simulation study of cellular electric properties in heart failure.

Priebe L(1), Beuckelmann DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, University of Cologne, Germany.

Patients with severe heart failure are at high risk of sudden cardiac death. In
the majority of these patients, sudden cardiac death is thought to be due to
ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Alterations of the electric properties of single
myocytes in heart failure may favor the occurrence of ventricular arrhythmias in 
these patients by inducing early or delayed afterdepolarizations. Mathematical
models of the cellular action potential and its underlying ionic currents could
help to elucidate possible arrhythmogenic mechanisms on a cellular level. In the 
present study, selected ionic currents based on human data are incorporated into 
a model of the ventricular action potential for the purpose of studying the
cellular electrophysiological consequences of heart failure. Ionic currents that 
are not yet sufficiently characterized in human ventricular myocytes are adopted 
from the action potential model developed by Luo and Rudy (LR model). The main
results obtained from this model are as follows: The action potential in
ventricular myocytes from failing hearts is longer than in nonfailing control
hearts. The major underlying mechanisms for this prolongation are the enhanced
activity of the Na+-Ca2+ exchanger, the slowed diastolic decay of the [Ca2+]i
transient, and the reduction of the inwardly rectifying K+ current and the Na+-K+
pump current in myocytes of failing hearts. Furthermore, the fast and slow
components of the delayed rectifier K+ current (I(Kr) and I(Ks), respectively)
are of utmost importance in determining repolarization of the human ventricular
action potential. In contrast, the influence of the transient outward K+ current 
on APD is only small in both cell groups. Inhibition of I(Kr) promotes the
development of early afterdepolarizations in failing, but not nonfailing,
myocytes. Furthermore, spontaneous Ca2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum
triggers a premature action potential only in failing myocytes. This model of the
ventricular action potential and its alterations in heart failure is intended to 
serve as a tool for investigating the effects of therapeutic interventions on the
electric excitability of the human ventricular myocardium.

PMID: 9633920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]