1. Channels (Austin). 2007 May-Jun;1(3):198-208. Epub 2007 Jul 6.

Mutational analysis of block and facilitation of HERG current by a class III
anti-arrhythmic agent, nifekalant.

Hosaka Y(1), Iwata M, Kamiya N, Yamada M, Kinoshita K, Fukunishi Y, Tsujimae K,
Hibino H, Aizawa Y, Inanobe A, Nakamura H, Kurachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan.

Chemicals and toxins are useful tools to elucidate the structure-function
relationship of various proteins including ion channels. The HERG channel is
blocked by many compounds and this may cause life-threatening cardiac arrhythmia.
Besides block, some chemicals such as the class III anti-arrhythmic agent
nifekalant stimulate HERG at low potentials by shifting its activation curve
towards hyperpolarizing voltages. This is called "facilitation". Here, we report 
mutations and simulations analyzing the association between nifekalant and
channel pore residues for block and facilitation. Alanine-scanning mutagenesis
was performed in the pore region of HERG. The mutations at the base of the pore
helix (T623A), the selectivity filter (V625A) and the S6 helix (G648A, Y652A and 
F656A) abolished and S624A attenuated both block and facilitation induced by the 
drug. On the other hand, the mutation of other residues caused either an increase
or a decrease in nifekalant-induced facilitation without affecting block. An
open-state homology model of the HERG pore suggested that T623, S624, Y652 and
F656 faced the central cavity, and were positioned within geometrical range for
the drug to be able to interact with all of them at the same time. Of these, S649
was the only polar residue located within possible interaction distance from the 
drug held in its blocking position. Further mutations and flexible-docking
simulations suggest that the size, but not the polarity, of the side chain at
S649 is critical for drug induced facilitation.

PMID: 18690032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]