1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 8;9(1):e84401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084401. eCollection 
2014.

A quantitative comparison of the behavior of human ventricular cardiac
electrophysiology models in tissue.

Elshrif MM(1), Cherry EM(2).

Author information: 
(1)B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences, Rochester
Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York, United States of America. (2)School
of Mathematical Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York,
United States of America.

Numerical integration of mathematical models of heart cell electrophysiology
provides an important computational tool for studying cardiac arrhythmias, but
the abundance of available models complicates selecting an appropriate model. We 
study the behavior of two recently published models of human ventricular action
potentials, the Grandi-Pasqualini-Bers (GPB) and the O'Hara-Virág-Varró-Rudy
(OVVR) models, and compare the results with four previously published models and 
with available experimental and clinical data. We find the shapes and durations
of action potentials and calcium transients differ between the GPB and OVVR
models, as do the magnitudes and rate-dependent properties of transmembrane
currents and the calcium transient. Differences also occur in the steady-state
and S1-S2 action potential duration and conduction velocity restitution curves,
including a maximum conduction velocity for the OVVR model roughly half that of
the GPB model and well below clinical values. Between single cells and tissue,
both models exhibit differences in properties, including maximum upstroke
velocity, action potential amplitude, and minimum diastolic interval. Compared to
experimental data, action potential durations for the GPB and OVVR models agree
fairly well (although OVVR epicardial action potentials are shorter), but maximum
slopes of steady-state restitution curves are smaller. Although studies show
alternans in normal hearts, it occurs only in the OVVR model, and only for a
narrow range of cycle lengths. We find initiated spiral waves do not progress to 
sustained breakup for either model. The dominant spiral wave period of the GPB
model falls within clinically relevant values for ventricular tachycardia (VT),
but for the OVVR model, the dominant period is longer than periods associated
with VT. Our results should facilitate choosing a model to match properties of
interest in human cardiac tissue and to replicate arrhythmia behavior more
closely. Furthermore, by indicating areas where existing models disagree, our
findings suggest avenues for further experimental work.

PMCID: PMC3885549
PMID: 24416228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]