1. PLoS One. 2009 Jul 8;4(7):e6169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006169.

A model of postural control in quiet standing: robust compensation of
delay-induced instability using intermittent activation of feedback control.

Asai Y(1), Tasaka Y, Nomura K, Nomura T, Casadio M, Morasso P.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Advanced Medical Engineering and Informatics, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2009;4(7). doi:
10.1371/annotation/96e08e7f-22f0-445d-8fb3-fe7b071d0a3a.

The main purpose of this study is to compare two different feedback controllers
for the stabilization of quiet standing in humans, taking into account that the
intrinsic ankle stiffness is insufficient and that there is a large delay
inducing instability in the feedback loop: 1) a standard linear, continuous-time 
PD controller and 2) an intermittent PD controller characterized by a switching
function defined in the phase plane, with or without a dead zone around the
nominal equilibrium state. The stability analysis of the first controller is
carried out by using the standard tools of linear control systems, whereas the
analysis of the intermittent controllers is based on the use of Poincaré maps
defined in the phase plane. When the PD-control is off, the dynamics of the
system is characterized by a saddle-like equilibrium, with a stable and an
unstable manifold. The switching function of the intermittent controller is
implemented in such a way that PD-control is 'off' when the state vector is near 
the stable manifold of the saddle and is 'on' otherwise. A theoretical analysis
and a related simulation study show that the intermittent control model is much
more robust than the standard model because the size of the region in the
parameter space of the feedback control gains (P vs. D) that characterizes stable
behavior is much larger in the latter case than in the former one. Moreover, the 
intermittent controller can use feedback parameters that are much smaller than
the standard model. Typical sway patterns generated by the intermittent
controller are the result of an alternation between slow motion along the stable 
manifold of the saddle, when the PD-control is off, and spiral motion away from
the upright equilibrium determined by the activation of the PD-control with low
feedback gains. Remarkably, overall dynamic stability can be achieved by
combining in a smart way two unstable regimes: a saddle and an unstable spiral.
The intermittent controller exploits the stabilizing effect of one part of the
saddle, letting the system evolve by alone when it slides on or near the stable
manifold; when the state vector enters the strongly unstable part of the saddle
it switches on a mild feedback which is not supposed to impose a strict stable
regime but rather to mitigate the impending fall. The presence of a dead zone in 
the intermittent controller does not alter the stability properties but improves 
the similarity with biological sway patterns. The two types of controllers are
also compared in the frequency domain by considering the power spectral density
(PSD) of the sway sequences generated by the models with additive noise.
Different from the standard continuous model, whose PSD function is similar to an
over-damped second order system without a resonance, the intermittent control
model is capable to exhibit the two power law scaling regimes that are typical of
physiological sway movements in humans.

PMCID: PMC2704954
PMID: 19584944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]