1. J Neurophysiol. 1991 Sep;66(3):839-50.

A model of the T-type calcium current and the low-threshold spike in thalamic
neurons.

Wang XJ(1), Rinzel J, Rogawski MA.

Author information: 
(1)Mathematical Research Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

1. A model of the transient, low-threshold voltage-dependent (T-type) Ca2+
current is constructed using recent whole-cell voltage-clamp data from
enzymatically isolated rat thalamocortical relay neurons. The T-type Ca2+ current
is described according to the Hodgkin-Huxley scheme, using the m3h format, with
rate constants determined from the experimental data (22-24 degrees C;
extracellular Ca2+ concentration [Ca2+]o = 3 mM). 2. The T-type Ca2+ current
inactivates rapidly during maintained depolarization (time constant, Tau h
approximately 20 ms at -20 mV), yet recovery from inactivation is slow (time
constant, Tau r approximately 270 ms at -80 mV). To reconcile these observations,
a two-step kinetic scheme is proposed for the inactivation gate. Each of the time
constants in this scheme is voltage dependent, with a maximum at about -85 mV (45
ms for one and 275 ms for the other). 3. Numerical simulations of recovery in a
two-pulse, voltage-clamp protocol compare favorably with experimental results
obtained by Coulter et al. as well as those obtained in an independent series of 
experiments with guinea pig thalamic neurons ([Ca2+]o = 10 mM). 4. For
current-clamp simulations, a leakage current gL (V-VL) is included; with VL = -65
mV, the calculated resting membrane potential is -63 mV. 5. It is shown that the 
T-type Ca2+ current together with the leakage current suffices to describe the
low-threshold spike (LTS), a slow, triangular-shaped depolarizing event that can 
be evoked only from relatively hyperpolarized membrane potentials and that
underlies the burst firing of Na(+)-dependent action potentials in thalamic
neurons. Outward currents are not required to reproduce the basic shape of the
LTS. 6. The LTS can be activated with either a depolarizing current step from a
sufficiently hyperpolarized level or on termination of a hyperpolarizing current 
step. In either case, the amplitude of the LTS is a monotonically increasing,
sigmoid-shape function of the hyperpolarizing current step intensity. 7. Because 
of the slower kinetic step of the channel's inactivation gate, our model predicts
that recovery of the LTS to greater than one-half amplitude would require a
prolonged hyperpolarization of greater than 100 ms (at body temperature). This
imposes an upper limit (approximately 10 Hz) on the frequency of repetitive
hyperpolarization that can elicit a train of LTSs and hence on the frequency of
any rhythm that requires LTS-mediated bursting of thalamic neurons.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1661326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]