1. J Biol Rhythms. 1999 Dec;14(6):433-48.

Limit cycle models for circadian rhythms based on transcriptional regulation in
Drosophila and Neurospora.

Leloup JC(1), Gonze D, Goldbeter A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté des Sciences, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Comment in
    J Biol Rhythms. 1999 Dec;14(6):486-9.

We examine theoretical models for circadian oscillations based on transcriptional
regulation in Drosophila and Neurospora. For Drosophila, the molecular model is
based on the negative feedback exerted on the expression of the per and tim genes
by the complex formed between the PER and TIM proteins. For Neurospora,
similarly, the model relies on the feedback exerted on the expression of the frq 
gene by its protein product FRQ. In both models, sustained rhythmic variations in
protein and mRNA levels occur in continuous darkness, in the form of limit cycle 
oscillations. The effect of light on circadian rhythms is taken into account in
the models by considering that it triggers degradation of the TIM protein in
Drosophila, and frq transcription in Neurospora. When incorporating the control
exerted by light at the molecular level, we show that the models can account for 
the entrainment of circadian rhythms by light-dark cycles and for the damping of 
the oscillations in constant light, though such damping occurs more readily in
the Drosophila model. The models account for the phase shifts induced by light
pulses and allow the construction of phase response curves. These compare well
with experimental results obtained in Drosophila. The model for Drosophila shows 
that when applied at the appropriate phase, light pulses of appropriate duration 
and magnitude can permanently or transiently suppress circadian rhythmicity. We
investigate the effects of the magnitude of light-induced changes on oscillatory 
behavior. Finally, we discuss the common and distinctive features of circadian
oscillations in the two organisms.

PMID: 10643740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]