The Journal of Neuroscience, October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413

Gamma Oscillation by Synaptic Inhibition in a Hippocampal
Interneuronal Network Model

Xiao-Jing Wang1 and Gyo¨ rgy Buzsa´ ki2
1Physics Department and Center for Complex Systems, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02254, and
2Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey 07102

Fast neuronal oscillations (gamma, 20 – 80 Hz) have been
observed in the neocortex and hippocampus during behav-
ioral arousal. Using computer simulations, we investigated
the hypothesis that such rhythmic activity can emerge in a
random network of interconnected GABAergic fast-spiking
interneurons. Speciﬁc conditions for the population synchro-
nization, on properties of single cells and the circuit, were
identiﬁed. These include the following: (1) that the amplitude
of spike afterhyperpolarization be above the GABAA synaptic
reversal potential; (2) that the ratio between the synaptic
decay time constant and the oscillation period be sufﬁciently
large; (3) that the effects of heterogeneities be modest be-
cause of a steep frequency– current relationship of
fast-
spiking neurons. Furthermore, using a population coherence
measure, based on coincident ﬁrings of neural pairs, it is
demonstrated that large-scale network synchronization re-

quires a critical (minimal) average number of synaptic con-
tacts per cell, which is not sensitive to the network size.

By changing the GABAA synaptic maximal conductance,
synaptic decay time constant, or the mean external excitatory
drive to the network, the neuronal ﬁring frequencies were grad-
ually and monotonically varied. By contrast, the network syn-
chronization was found to be high only within a frequency band
coinciding with the gamma (20 – 80 Hz) range. We conclude that
the GABAA synaptic transmission provides a suitable mecha-
nism for synchronized gamma oscillations in a sparsely con-
nected network of fast-spiking interneurons. In turn, the inter-
neuronal network can presumably maintain subthreshold
oscillations in principal cell populations and serve to synchro-
nize discharges of spatially distributed neurons.
Key words: gamma rhythm; hippocampus;

interneurons;

GABAA; synchronization; computer model

Although fast gamma cortical oscillation has been the subject of
active investigation in recent years (cf. Singer and Gray, 1995), its
underlying neuronal mechanisms remain elusive. Two major is-
sues are the cellular origin of rhythmicity (Llina´s et al., 1991;
McCormick et al., 1993; Wang, 1993) and the mechanism(s) of
large-scale population synchronicity (Freeman, 1975; Bush and
Douglas 1991; Engel et al., 1991; Hansel and Sompolinsky, 1996).
Traditionally, recurrent excitation between principal (pyramidal)
neurons is viewed as a major source of rhythmogenesis as well as
neuronal synchronization. However, in model studies in which
quantitative data about the synaptic time course were incorpo-
rated, it was found that glutamatergic synaptic excitation of the
AMPA type usually desynchronizes rather than synchronizes re-
petitive spike ﬁrings of mutually coupled neurons (Hansel et al.,
1995; van Vreeswijk et al., 1995). Therefore, recurrent connec-
tions between pyramidal cells alone do not seem to account for
the network coherence during cortical gamma oscillations. It was
suggested that pyramidal cell populations may be entrained by
synchronous rhythmic inhibition originating from fast-spiking in-
terneurons (Buzsa´ki et al., 1983; Lytton and Sejnowski, 1991).
During ﬁeld gamma oscillations, intracellular recordings from

Received May 5, 1996; revised June 25, 1996; accepted July 31, 1996.

This work was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (MH53717-
01), Ofﬁce of Naval Research (N00014-95-1-0319), and the Sloan Foundation to
X.J.W.; and HFSP and the National Institute of Neurological Disease and Stroke
(NS34994) to G.B. and X.J.W. Simulations were partly performed at the Pittsburgh
Supercomputing Center. We thank D. Golomb, D. Hansel, J.-C. Lacaille, and C.
McBain for discussions, A. Sik for preparing Figure 2, and L. Abbott, J. Lisman, and
R. Traub for carefully reading this manuscript.

Correspondence should be addressed to Xiao-Jing Wang, Center for Complex

Systems, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02254.
Copyright 䉷 1996 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/96/166402-12$05.00/0

pyramidal cells revealed both EPSPs and IPSPs phase-locked to
the ﬁeld oscillation frequencies (Jagadeesh et al., 1992; Chen and
Fetz, 1993; Solte´sz and Descheˆnes, 1993).

In this paper, we address the question whether, in the hip-
pocampus, an interneuronal network can generate a coherent
oscillatory output to the pyramidal neurons, thereby providing a
substrate for the synaptic organization of coherent gamma popu-
lation oscillations. In the behaving rat, physiologically identiﬁed
interneurons were shown to ﬁre spikes in the gamma frequency
range and phase-locked to the local ﬁeld waves (Bragin et al.,
1995). Intracellular studies and immunochemical staining demon-
strated that these interneurons are interconnected via GABAergic
synapses (Lacaille et al., 1987; Sik et al., 1995; Gulya´s et al., 1996).
Theoretical studies suggest that these GABAergic interconnec-
tions may synchronize an interneuronal network when appropri-
ate conditions on the time course of synaptic transmission are
satisﬁed (Wang and Rinzel, 1992, 1993; van Vreeswijk et al.,
1995). Moreover, in a recent in vitro experiment (Whittington et
al., 1995; Traub et al., 1996), the excitatory glutamate AMPA and
NMDA synaptic transmissions were blocked in the hippocampal
slice. When metabotropic glutamate receptors were activated,
transient oscillatory IPSPs in the 40 Hz frequency range were
observed in pyramidal cells. These IPSPs were assumed to origi-
nate from the ﬁring activities of fast-spiking interneurons synchro-
nized by their interconnections. Computer simulations (Whitting-
ton et al., 1995; Traub et al., 1996) lend further support to this
hypothesis.

To assess whether an interneuronal network can subserve an
adequate basis for the gamma frequency population rhythm in the
hippocampus, it is necessary to identify its speciﬁc requirements

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413 6403

on the cellular properties and network connectivities, as well as to
determine whether these conditions are satisﬁed by particular
interneuronal subtypes. The present study is devoted to investi-
gate such requirements using computer simulations. We found
that synaptic transmission via GABAA receptors in a sparsely
connected network of model interneurons can provide a mecha-
nism for gamma frequency oscillations, and we compared the
modeling results with the anatomical and electrophysiological
data from hippocampal fast spiking interneurons.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Model neuron. Each interneuron is described by a single compartment
and obeys the current balance equation:

Cm

dV
dt

⫽ ⫺INa ⫺ IK ⫺ IL ⫺ Isyn ⫹ Iapp ,

(2.1)

where Cm ⫽ 1 ␮F/cm2 and Iapp is the injected current (in ␮A/cm2). The
leak current IL ⫽ gL(V ⫺ EL) has a conductance gL ⫽ 0.1 mS/cm2, so that
the passive time constant ␶0 ⫽ Cm/gL ⫽ 10 msec; EL ⫽ ⫺65 mV.

The spike-generating Na⫹ and K⫹ voltage-dependent ion currents (INa
and IK) are of the Hodgkin–Huxley type (Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952).
The transient sodium current INa ⫽ gNam⬁
3 h(V ⫺ ENa), where the acti-
vation variable m is assumed fast and substituted by its steady-state
function m⬁ ⫽ ␣m/(␣m ⫹ ␤m); ␣m(V ) ⫽ ⫺0.1(V ⫹ 35)/(exp(⫺0.1(V ⫹
35)) ⫺ 1), ␤m(V ) ⫽ 4exp(⫺(V ⫹ 60)/18). The inactivation variable h
obeys a ﬁrst-order kinetics:

dh
dt

⫽ ␾共␣h共1 ⫺ h兲 ⫺ ␤hh兲

(2.2)

where ␣h(V ) ⫽ 0.07 exp(⫺(V ⫹ 58)/20) and ␤h(V ) ⫽ 1/(exp(⫺0.1(V ⫹
28)) ⫹ 1). gNa ⫽ 35 mS/cm2; ENa ⫽ 55 mV, ␾ ⫽ 5.

The delayed rectiﬁer IK ⫽ gKn4 (V ⫺ EK), where the activation

variable n obeys the following equation:

dn
dt

⫽ ␾共␣n共1 ⫺ n兲 ⫺ ␤nn兲

(2.3)

with ␣n(V ) ⫽ ⫺0.01(V ⫹ 34)/(exp(⫺0.1(V ⫹ 34)) ⫺ 1) and ␤n(V ) ⫽ 0.125
exp(⫺(V ⫹ 44)/80); gK ⫽ 9 mS/cm2, and EK ⫽ ⫺90 mV.

These kinetics and maximal conductances are modiﬁed from Hodgkin
and Huxley (1952), so that our neuron model displays two salient prop-
erties of hippocampal and neocortical fast-spiking interneurons. First, the
action potential in these cells is followed by a brief afterhyperpolarization
(AHP) of about ⫺15 mV measured from the spike threshold of approx-
imately ⫺55 mV (McCormick et al., 1985; Lacaille and Williams, 1990;
Morin et al., 1995; Zhang and McBain, 1995). Thus, during the spike
repolarization the membrane potential reaches a minimum of about ⫺70
mV, rather than being close to the reversal potential of the K⫹ current,
EK ⫽ ⫺90 mV. This is accomplished in the model by relatively small
maximal conductance gK and fast gating process of IK so that it deacti-
vates quickly during spike repolarization.

Second, these interneurons have the ability to ﬁre repetitive spikes at
high frequencies (with the frequency– current slope up to 200 – 400 Hz/
nA) (McCormick et al., 1985; Lacaille and Williams, 1990; Zhang and
McBain, 1995). With fast kinetics of the inactivation (h) of INa, the
activation (n) of IK, and the relatively high threshold of IK, the model
interneuron displays a large range of repetitive spiking frequencies in
response to a constant injected current Iapp (Fig. 1 A, left). It has a small
current threshold (the rheobase Iapp ⯝ 0.2 ␮A/cm2), and the ﬁring rate is
as high as 400 Hz for Iapp ⯝ 20 mA/cm2. Similar to cortical interneurons
(McCormick et al., 1985; Lacaille and Williams, 1990), the whole fre-
quency– current curve is not linear, and the frequency– current slope is
larger at smaller Iapp values (lower frequencies) (Fig. 1 A, right). As a
consequence, the neural population is more sensitive to input heteroge-
neities at smaller Iapp values. This is demonstrated in Figure 1 B, where a
Gaussian distribution of Iapp is applied to a population of uncoupled
neurons (N ⫽ 100), with a mean I␮ and standard deviation I␴. Given a
ﬁxed and small I␴ ⫽ 0.03, the mean drive I␮ is varied systematically, and
the resulting dispersion in the neuronal ﬁring frequencies, f␴/f␮ (standard
deviation of the ﬁring rate/mean ﬁring rate) is shown as function of I␮

Figure 1. Model of single neuron and synapse. A, Left, Firing frequency
versus applied current intensity ( f ⫺ Iapp curve) of the model neuron. The
ﬁring rate can be as high as 400 Hz. Right, The derivative df/dIapp shows
that the f/Iapp slope is much larger at smaller Iapp (lower f ) values. B,
Dispersion in ﬁring rates caused by heterogeneity in input current. A
Gaussian distribution for input currents, with standard deviation I␴ ⫽ 0.03,
is applied to a population of uncoupled neurons. The dispersion in ﬁring
rates was computed as the ratio between the standard deviation and the
mean of ﬁring rates ( f␴/f␮). This ratio is much larger for smaller mean
current amplitude I␮ (top). Plotting f␴/f␮ versus f␮ shows that the disper-
sion in ﬁring rates is dramatically increased for f␮ ⬍ 20 Hz (bottom). C,
A brief current pulse applied to a presynaptic cell generates a single
action potential, which elicits an inhibitory postsynaptic current (Isyn) and
membrane potential change in a postsynaptic cell ( gsyn ⫽ 0.1 mS/cm2).

(Fig. 1 B, top). When plotted versus f␮, it is evident that with the same
amount of dispersion in applied current (I␴) the dispersion in ﬁring rates
f␴/f␮ is dramatically increased for f␮ ⬍ 20 Hz (Fig. 1 B, bottom). This
feature has important implications for the frequency-dependent network
behaviors (see Results).

Model synapse. The synaptic current Isyn ⫽ gsyns(V ⫺ Esyn), where gsyn
is the maximal synaptic conductance and Esyn is the reversal potential.
Typically, we set gsyn ⫽ 0.1 mS/cm2 and Esyn ⫽ ⫺75 mV (Buhl et al.,
1995). The gating variable s represents the fraction of open synaptic ion
channels. We assume that s obeys a ﬁrst-order kinetics (Perkel et al.,
1981; Wang and Rinzel 1993):

ds
dt

⫽ ␣F共Vpre兲共1 ⫺ s兲 ⫺ ␤s,

(2.4)

where the normalized concentration of the postsynaptic transmitter-
receptor complex, F(Vpre), is assumed to be an instantaneous and sigmoid
function of the presynaptic membrane potential, F(Vpre) ⫽ 1/(1 ⫹
exp(⫺(Vpre ⫺ ␪syn)/2)), where ␪syn (set to 0 mV) is high enough so that the
transmitter release occurs only when the presynaptic cell emits a spike.

6404 J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

2.

In

vivo

double

staining

of
Figure
parvalbumin-positive interneuron in the hip-
pocampus. A, The axonal arbor of an intracel-
lularly labeled basket cell, largely conﬁned in
the pyramidal layer, is overlayed with immuno-
chemically stained other parvalbumin-positive
cells. The two-dimensional distribution of the
interneuron-interneuron contacts is shown in B
and then collapsed to a one-dimensional distri-
bution (along the septo-temporal axis) in C.
Overall, 99 boutons
in contact with 64
parvalbumin-positive cells were counted (adapt-
ed from Sik et al., 1995).

The channel opening rate ␣⫽ 12 msec⫺1 assures a fast rise of the Isyn, and
the channel closing rate ␤is the inverse of the decay time constant of the
Isyn; typically, we set ␤ ⫽ 0.1 msec⫺1 (␶syn ⫽ 10 msec). An example of Isyn
and IPSP elicited by a single presynaptic spike is illustrated in Figure 1C.
Random network connectivity. The network model consists of N cells.
The coupling between neurons is randomly assigned, with a ﬁxed average
number of synaptic inputs per neuron, Msyn. The probability that a pair of
neurons are connected in either direction is p ⫽ Msyn/N. For comparison,
we also used fully coupled (all-to-all) connectivity (Msyn ⫽ N ). In the
model, the maximal synaptic conductance gsyn is divided by Msyn, so that
when the number of synapses Msyn is varied, the total synaptic drive per
cell in average remains the same.

Msyn is the convergence/divergence factor of the neural coupling in the
network. Experimentally, an estimate of this important quantity has been
obtained for an interneuronal network of the CA1 hippocampus (Sik et
al., 1995). A parvalbumin-positive (PV⫹) basket interneuron was stained
intracellularly by biocytin in vivo. Its axonal arborization was largely
conﬁned in the striatum pyramidale (Fig. 2 A). Other PV⫹ interneurons
were stained immunochemically, and the contacts made by the biocytin-
ﬁlled cell with other PV⫹ cells were counted (Sik et al., 1995). It was
concluded that a single PV⫹ basket cell makes synaptic contacts with at
least 60 other PV⫹ cells (a majority of which are basket cells) within a
spatial region of the volume up to 0.1– 0.2 mm3 (Sik et al., 1995) (Fig.
2 B). This tissue volume contains as many as 500 –1000 other PV⫹ cells,
because the PV⫹ neurons in the pyramidal layer have a cell density of
5.4 ⫻ 103 cells/mm3 (Aika et al., 1994). Hence, for the CA1 network of
basket cells, the experimentally estimated Msyn is ⬃60. The probability of
postsynaptic contacts, however, decreases with the distance between the
cell pair (Fig. 2C).

Heterogeneous input. In the model, single neurons are not identical.
Each receives a depolarizing current Iapp of different intensity and, hence,
has a different ﬁring rate. The bias current Iapp has a Gaussian distribu-
tion with a mean I␮ and a standard deviation I␴. The parameter I␮
determines the mean excitation by the external drive; I␴ measures the
degree of the heterogeneity in the cell population.

A measure of network coherence. To quantify the synchronization of
neuronal ﬁrings in the network, we introduce a coherence measure based
on the normalized cross-correlations of neuronal pairs in the network
(Gerstein and Kiang, 1960; Welsh et al., 1995). The coherence between
two neurons i and j is measured by their cross-correlation of spike trains
at zero time lag within a time bin of ⌬t ⫽ ␶. More speciﬁcally, suppose
that a long time interval T is divided into small bins of ␶and that two spike

trains are given by X(l) ⫽ 0 or 1, Y(l) ⫽ 0 or 1, l ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , K (T/K ⫽ ␶).
Thus, we deﬁne a coherence measure for the pair as:

冘
冑冘

l⫽1

K

K

␬ij共␶兲 ⫽

X共l兲Y共l兲

X共l兲冘

K

.

Y共l兲

(2.5)

l⫽1

l⫽1

We have also used a slightly different deﬁnition where the mean ﬁring
rates are substracted from X(l ) and Y(l ); the substraction did not signif-
icantly change our results reported below.

The population coherence measure ␬(␶) is deﬁned by the average of
␬ij(␶) over many pairs of neurons in the network. This coherence measure
presents a number of useful properties. First, it is naturally based on
cross-correlations and, although we use it here to describe synchroniza-
tion of oscillations,
it can be applied to quantify the synchrony of
nonoscillatory neuronal ﬁrings. It is calculated from spike trains, requires
relatively small sample sizes, and can be used for data analysis of exper-
imental extracellular multiunit recordings. Second, ␬(␶) is between 0 and
1 for all ␶. For very small ␶, ␬(␶) is close to 1 (resp. 0) in the case of
maximal synchrony (resp. asynchrony). Third, the degree of synchrony of
the network dynamics can be quantiﬁed by how ␬(␶) behaves as function
of ␶. In the case of full synchrony, ␬(␶) is 1 for all nonzero ␶ values;
whereas in the case of total asynchrony, ␬(␶) is a linearly increasing
function of ␶ (see below). Finally, the distribution of ␬ij(␶) over neural
pairs provides detailed information about the interneuronal interactions
and synchronization.

In Results, the population coherence measure ␬(␶) is calculated by aver-

aging over all neural pairs in the network of size N. Typically N ⫽ 100.

Numerical methods. The network model was integrated using the
fourth-order Runge–Kutta method, with a time step of 0.05 msec. For
random network connectivity and heterogeneity, each set of simulations
was run with three to ﬁve random realizations of the network connections
and applied current distribution. As initial conditions, the membrane
potential is uniformly distributed between ⫺70 and ⫺50 mV and the
other channel-gating variables are set at their corresponding steady-state
values. Coherence was calculated after 1000 msec transients. Simulations
were performed on a SUN Sparc Station or a Y-MP Cray Supercomputer.

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413 6405

Figure 3. Synchronization by GABAA synapses. In these simulations,
neurons are identical and coupled in an all-to-all fashion. Left panels,
Rastergrams; right panels, membrane potentials of two cells (dotted line,
⫺52 mV). The synchrony is realized when the spike AHP of the cells does
not fall below the synaptic reversal potential Esyn ⫽ ⫺75 mV (dot-dashed
line on the right panels). From A to C, ␾ ⫽ 5, 3.33, and 2 respectively; Iapp
⫽ 1, 1.2, and 1.4 ␮A/cm2 accordingly to preserve a similar oscillation
frequency. With smaller ␾ values, IK is slower and the AHP amplitude
(VAHP) is more negative. When VAHP ⬍ Esyn, the full synchrony is lost (C).

RESULTS
Spike afterhyperpolarization, inhibition,
and synchronization
We start by considering a simple case in which all individual cells
are identical (i.e., without heterogeneity) and are coupled in an
all-to-all fashion (i.e., without randomness in connectivity). As
shown in Figure 3A (left), cells starting at random and asynchro-
nous initial conditions quickly become synchronized and within
5–6 oscillatory cycles their spiking times are perfectly in-phase.
The spike AHP amplitude is 15 mV measured from the spike
threshold (⫺52 mV), so the maximal AHP, VAHP ⫽ ⫺67 mV,
stays above the reversal potential of the synaptic current (Esyn ⫽
⫺75 mV). The inequality VAHP ⬎ Esyn means that during the time
course of an action potential and its repolarization, the synaptic
action is always hyperpolarizing. This relationship between intrin-
sic and synaptic properties was found to be an important condi-
tion under which the global network synchronization can be
achieved (Fig. 3B,C). In the example (Fig. 3B), the speed of the
INa inactivation and the IK activation is slowed down (␾ ⫽ 3.33
instead of 5), so that repolarization becomes larger (VAHP ⯝ ⫺73
mV, close to Esyn). In this case, the network synchronization takes
much longer time to realize. With ␾ ⫽ 2 (Fig. 3C), VAHP is ⫺78
mV, which is below Esyn, and global network synchrony is lost.
Instead, the network is dynamically broken into two clusters:
within each cluster the cells ﬁre spikes simultaneously, and the
two clusters alternate in time. Such clustering dynamics is a

Figure 4. Dependence of the network synchrony on the synaptic reversal
potential Esyn. A, The coherence index ␬ (␶ ⫽ 1 msec) is plotted versus
Esyn. As Esyn is varied, VAHP remains essentially the same (vertical dashed
line). There is a sudden transition from synchrony to asynchrony as Esyn is
increased above VAHP. B, An example of asynchronous behavior when
cells are coupled by excitatory synapses (Esyn ⫽ 0 mV, ␶syn ⫽ 2 msec; Iapp
⫽ 0.1). The oscillation frequency is f ⫽ 43 Hz. C, The network coherence
function ␬(␶) increases linearly with ␶, from 0 (at ␶ ⫽ 0) to 1 (at ␶ ⫽ T ),
showing that the relative ﬁring time of neural pairs is almost uniformly
distributed between 0 and the oscillation period T ⫽ 1/f.

commonly observed behavior of interneuronal networks (Golomb
et al., 1994). Hence, synaptic inhibition of the GABAA-type
provides a mechanism by which a macroscopic coherence of the
network (global synchrony or clustering) can be realized.

To investigate further the dependence of the network synchro-
nization on the inhibitory nature of synaptic interactions, the
intrinsic cell properties were kept unchanged, while the reversal
potential Esyn was gradually varied (Fig. 4). In Figure 4A the
global coherence index ␬ (compare Eq. 2.5), plotted versus Esyn,
remains at 1 (perfect synchrony) for Esyn ⬍ VAHP. It displays an
abrupt drop for Esyn ⬎ VAHP and is close to 0 for Esyn ⬎ ⫺60 mV.
The oscillation frequency dramatically increases as the synaptic
effect becomes depolarizing (not shown). Unlike the two cluster
dynamics of Figure 3C with the coherence index ␬ ⫽ 0.5, in the
regime characterized by ␬ ⬃ 0 the relative timing of neuronal
ﬁrings is essentially arbitrary. This happens in our network model
when the synaptic interactions are excitatory. In the example given
in Figure 4, B and C, Esyn ⫽ 0 mV and ␶syn ⫽ 2 msec, so that the
synaptic current mimic that of the glutamate AMPA type. Be-
cause recurrent excitation considerably enhances the neural dis-
charge rates, weaker external drive (I␮ ⫽ 0.1 instead of 1) was
used so as to obtain a similar (⬃40 Hz) ﬁring frequency with
excitatory rather than inhibitory interactions. In this case, al-
though all neurons have very similar rhythmic frequencies, their
relative ﬁring phases are almost uniformly distributed between
zero and the common oscillation period T (Fig. 4B). Hence, the
probability of coincident ﬁring within a time bin ␶ between two
cells increases proportionally with ␶, and the network coherence
function ␬(␶) grows linearly from zero at ␶ ⫽ 0 to its maximal
value of 1 at ␶ ⫽ T msec (Fig. 4C).

6406 J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

Figure 5. Effects of the network heterogeneity. A, The coherence index ␬
(␶ ⫽ 1 msec) versus I␴ (the standard deviation of the applied current
distribution). The network becomes asynchronous for I␴ ⱖ 0.05. Examples
indicated by arrows (I␴ ⫽ 0.03 and 0.1) are illustrated in C–E and F–H,
respectively. B, The mean ( f␮) and standard deviation ( f␴) of the ﬁring
rates averaged over individual neurons are plotted versus I␴. Note a
decrease of f␮ and a linear increase of f␴ for I␴ ⱖ 0.05. The sensitivity to
I␴ is related to the steep frequency–current relationship of single cells.
C–E, A partially synchronous state. C, The rastergram. D, The coherence
function ␬(␶) increases with ␶ rapidly, displays a plateau, and reaches the
value of 1 near ␶ ⫽ 1/f␮. E, The derivative of ␬(␶) shows a sharp peak at
␶ ⫽ 0. F–H, An asynchronous state, as seen by the rastergram ( F ). ␬(␶) is
linear with ␶and reaches 1 near ␶ ⫽ 1/f␮ (G), and its derivative is ﬂat (H).

Heterogeneity and asynchrony
It is intuitively expected that network synchrony cannot be glo-
bally maintained if individual neurons display very different in-
trinsic oscillation frequencies. We studied the effects of heteroge-
neity, using a Gaussian distribution of
the applied current
intensity Iapp with standard deviation I␴. As illustrated in Figure
5A, the network coherence deteriorates quite rapidly with increas-
ing I␴. This sensitivity is related to the large frequency–current
slope of fast-spiking interneurons (Fig. 1A,B), so that in a popu-
lation of uncoupled cells a small current dispersion may imply a
wide distribution of ﬁring frequencies. When neurons are synap-
tically coupled, the distribution of ﬁring frequencies is a product
of their interactions. As shown in Figure 5B, for small dispersion
in Iapp (I␴ ⬍ 0.02), minor differences in intrinsic ﬁring rates are
overcome by the coupling, and the standard deviation of ﬁring
rates f␴ ⫽ 0. As the network coherence erodes with larger I␴
values, f␴ grows linearly with I␴ (Fig. 5B). This linear frequency–
current relationship in standard deviation is a network property of
coupled cells. By contrast, the mean ﬁring rate f␮ changes only
slightly, illustrating the relative independence of the neural ﬁring

Figure 6. Synaptic ﬁeld in a large asynchronous network. To demonstrate
further the asynchronous nature of the network behavior of Figure 5F–H,
the temporal variance ␴2 (N ) of the population synaptic ﬁeld s(t) was
calculated for different network sizes (N ⫽ 100, 200, . . . , 1000). As
expected for asynchronoized network states (see text), ␴2 (N ) decreases as
⬃1/N (A). Three examples of s(t) are shown in B, and their power spectra
in C (arrow indicating increasing N). Thus, the ﬂuctuations of s(t) vanish
for large network sizes.

rates and synchronicity. The moderate decrease in f␮, however, is
related to the decreased degree of network coherence, because
asynchronized cell ﬁrings result in an averaged tonic hyperpolar-
ization that slows down the ﬁring rate (see below).

Figure 5, C and D, illustrates a partially coherent state. In the
rastergram (Fig. 5C), neurons are labeled in the increasing order
of their Iapp values. The cells with the smallest injected currents
are not in synchrony with those ﬁring at higher rates. The popu-
lation coherence measure ␬(␶) increases sharply with ␶ and
reaches the value of 1 at ␶ ⯝ 1/f␮ (Fig. 5D). Considered as a
function of ␶, ␬(␶) may be viewed as a distribution function of the
neural pairs whose relative ﬁring phase is ␶, between 0 and the
mean oscillation period (estimated as T␮ ⫽ 1/f␮). The derivative
d␬/d␶, therefore, is the corresponding distribution density. Net-
work synchronization is manifested by a peak at zero phase of
d␬/d␶(Fig. 5E), reﬂecting the sharp increase of ␬near ␶⫽ 0. Note
that a second peak is expected near ␶ ⫽ T␮ (Fig. 5E) because the
spiking event is periodic.

The network dynamics with I␴ ⫽ 0.1 is illustrated in Fig. 5,F– H.
By contrast to Figure 5C–E, here the rastergram is quite irregular
(Fig. 5F). The linear form of the function ␬(␶) (Fig. 5G) and its
ﬂat derivative (Fig. 5H) are consistent with a totally desynchro-
nized behavior, where the relative ﬁring phase of neural pairs is
uniformly distributed between 0 and T␮.

Without the aid of the coherence function ␬(␶), it would be
difﬁcult to conclude from the rastergram (F) that the network is
completely disordered. Indeed, if one looks at the summated
synaptic drive, s(t) ⫽ (1/N) 兺i⫽1
N si(t), oscillatory ﬂuctuations are
signiﬁcant in this “population ﬁeld” (Fig. 6B, top). This is because,

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413 6407

if every cell oscillates, the summation of a relatively small number
(e.g., N ⫽ 100) of oscillatory signals would still show some oscil-
lations, even if cells are completely asynchronous. To assess the
macroscopic coherence of the network, one can compute the
temporal variance ␴2 of s(t) for different network sizes and assess
whether the ﬂuctuations in s(t) persist in large networks. The
network is asynchronous if ␴2 of s(t) decreases inversely with the
network size, ␴2(N) ⬃ 1/N (Hansel and Sompolinsky, 1996). This
is shown to be the case in Figure 6A. As N increases, s(t) becomes
ﬂatter (Fig. 6B) and the peak in the power spectrum gets smaller
(Fig. 6C). This example shows that global network synchrony
cannot be assessed correctly by oscillatory ﬂuctuations in the
population ﬁeld by the presence of a peak in the power spectrum
if the network size is not sufﬁciently large.
Sparse network and minimal connectedness
Random connections among interneurons can be introduced into
the model by assuming that a cell makes synaptic contact to a
second cell with a probability p. Then, if N is the total number of
cells, there are Msyn ⫽ pN presynaptic cells that converge to a
postsynaptic cell, on average. As shown above, the network can be
synchronized with all-to-all connectivity (Msyn ⫽ N, p ⫽ 1).
Because synchronization is impossible without synaptic connec-
tions (Msyn ⫽ 0), we examined the dependence of the population
synchrony on Msyn. To evaluate the effect of sparse connectivity
separately, Msyn was gradually varied for a network of 100 iden-
tical neurons (i.e., without heterogeneity). As shown in Figure 7A,
the population coherence (as measured by ␬) is essentially zero
for Msyn below a critical value ⯝40; above which it starts to
become signiﬁcant, increases rapidly with Msyn, and reaches the
limit (Msyn ⫽ N). Thus, the
maximum of 1 in the all-to-all
dependence of the network synchrony on Msyn is highly nonlinear.
There is a minimal value of Msyn and neural interconnections have
to be sufﬁciently dense to generate global population synchroni-
zation. This critical Msyn value is not simply a required minimum
for the total synaptic drive per cell, because it does not change
noticeably when the maximal synaptic conductance is reduced by
a factor of 2 (Fig. 7A). Also, in the presence of heterogeneity (e.g.,
with I␴ ⫽ 0.03), the critical Msyn value remains the same, but the
quantitative degree of network coherence for Msyn larger than the
critical value was reduced (data not shown). On the other hand,
this minimal connectedness depends on the probability rules in
the network design and on the network dynamical state under
consideration. For instance, it is much smaller if the number of
synapses per cell is exactly the same number Msyn, but the actual
set of presynaptic cells is chosen randomly (Fig. 7A). Or, when the
oscillation frequency is increased from ⬃35 Hz to ⬃100 Hz with
I␮ ⫽ 3 instead of 1, the network is synchronized only with Msyn ⬎
75 (Fig. 7A).

We next examined whether the required minimal connected-
ness increases in proportion with the network size. Simulations
were performed with N ⫽ 100, 200, 500, and 1000, and it was
found that the onset of network coherence corresponded to a
small value of Msyn, close to Msyn ⫽ 60 for large network sizes
(Fig. 7B). Therefore, the minimal number of synapses per cell that
is required for the network synchronization is not a fraction of the
total number N of cells. It either remains ﬁnite for large N or it
could conceivably depend weakly on N.
Partial synchronization in a sparse and
heterogeneous network
As stated above, the minimal connectedness for a network coher-
ence remains the same when a moderate amount of heterogeneity

Figure 7. Minimal random connectivity is required for large-scale net-
work synchronization. A, The coherence index ␬ (␶ ⫽ 1 msec) is plotted
versus the mean number of synaptic inputs per cell Msyn (N ⫽ 100). Filled
circle, I␮ ⫽ 1 and gsyn ⫽ 0.1 (reference parameter set). In this case, the
network synchrony is realized when Msyn is larger than a critical value Mcrit
⯝ 40. This curve remains essentially the same when the maximal synaptic
conductance is reduced by 1/2 (open circle). By comparison, if the number
of inputs per cell is identical to all cells, and equals Msyn, the synchrony
occurs with very small values of Msyn (ⱖ5; ﬁlled square). With I␮ ⫽ 3 (solid
triangle), the mean oscillation frequency is increased from 35 to 100 Hz;
the critical value of Msyn for the network coherence is much larger (⯝70).
B, The coherence index ␬ (␶ ⫽ 1 msec) versus Msyn for different numbers
of neurons N ⫽ 100, 200, 500, 1000 (with reference parameter set). The
onset of network coherence occurs at a critical value of Msyn, which does
not grow as a fraction of the network size.

is added. Figure 8 illustrates a partially synchronized network,
with both sparse connections (Msyn ⫽ 60) and a dispersion in the
external drive (I␴ ⫽ 0.03). In that case, a major fraction of
neurons (group I) displays similar ﬁring rates (close to 39 Hz),
although their intrinsic ﬁring rates are different. The remaining
neurons (group II) have lower ﬁring rates (below 34 Hz) that are
scattered in the diagram. The membrane potential trace of a
representive cell is shown in Figure 8B, together with its synaptic
drive ssyn (sum of the synaptic gating variables to that cell) and the
population synaptic ﬁeld, both displaying fairly regular oscillations
at the same frequency. Cross-correlations of membrane potentials
between the representative cell (a in Fig. 8C) and three other cells

6408 J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

(b, c, and d in Fig. 8C) show that some pairs (ac and ad) are
synchronized with near-zero phase shift, but a signiﬁcant phase
difference may be present for other pairs (e.g., ab; Fig. 8D).

The normalized cross-correlation of spike trains at zero phase
lag, deﬁned as our coherence index ␬ij for the pair (i, j), was
calculated for all neural pairs in the network and plotted against
the difference in the ﬁring rates of the pair 兩 fi ⫺ fj兩 (Fig. 8E).
Those pairs with both ﬁring rates above 34 Hz (group I) are
plotted in the top panel, and the other pairs are plotted in the
bottom panel. Comparison of the two panels reveals that high
zero-phase synchronization (large ␬ij) occurs only in pairs of
group I neurons, and with similar ﬁring frequencies (small 兩 fi ⫺
fj兩). For those pairs in the bottom panel, ␬ij is small even for pairs
with almost identical ﬁring frequencies. Therefore, the network is
subdivided into two groups of neurons, and only group I neurons
are synchronized with near zero-phase shift. It is not immediately
clear why all neurons in the asynchronous group have lower, but
not higher, ﬁring frequencies than the synchronous group.

On the other hand, the neural pairs can be classiﬁed into three
categories, according to whether they are monosynaptically un-
coupled, coupled in one direction, or coupled in both directions.
Histograms of ␬ij, however, do not show conspicious difference
between such categories (Fig. 8F), indicating that the degree of
synchronization between a pair is not primarily determined by
their direct monosynaptic contacts. We conclude, therefore, that
interneuronal coherence emerges as a network phenomenon. The
global character of network synchrony is quantiﬁed by ␬, the
average of ␬ij over all pairs. The population coherence function
␬(␶) increases rapidly with the time bin ␶and reaches the value of
1 for ␶⯝ T␮, where again T␮ is the average oscillation period (Fig.
8G). Its derivative shows a clear peak at ␶ ⫽ 0 (Fig. 8H).

The partially synchronous dynamics cannot be maintained if the
interneuronal connections are too sparse (Fig. 7). Indeed, when
Msyn is decreased from 60 to 30, with all of the other parameters
remaining the same, the network becomes asynchronous (Fig. 9).
In this case, neurons are not locked to a same ﬁring frequency
(Fig. 9A), the rastergram looks irregular (Fig. 9C), the population
synaptic ﬁeld is almost constant in time (although the synaptic
drive to a single cell still shows residual oscillatory ﬂuctuations)
(Fig. 9B), and the cross-correlations between cell pairs are ﬂat
(Fig. 9D). Corroboratively, the zero-phase synchronization is very
low for all neural pairs (Fig. 9E,F), in contrast with Figure 8, E
and F. The global coherence function ␬(␶) is linear in ␶(Fig. 9G),
and its derivative is ﬂat (Fig. 9H), as expected for a fully asyn-
chronous neural network.

Dependence on the synaptic time constant
It was shown that the 40 Hz oscillations in hippocampal interneu-
rons are sensitive to the decay time constant ␶syn of the GABAA
synapse (Whittington et al., 1995; Traub et al., 1996). We have
conﬁrmed their result that an increased ␶syn induces a decrease in
the oscillation frequency (Fig. 10A, left). This frequency reduction
occurs largely because the slowly decaying synaptic inhibition
accumulates in time, resulting in a tonic level of hyperpolarization
that counteracts the external depolarization. This is shown in
Figure 10B, in which the synaptic drive to a representative cell is
displayed for three different values of ␶syn. The time average is
indicated by a horizontal line, which is higher (0.5, 0.64, 0.7) for
larger ␶syn values (10, 20, and 40 msec, respectively).

We also considered how the network synchronization depends on
␶syn. Within a ﬁxed time window, a pair of cells has a higher chance
to ﬁre simultaneously if their ﬁring frequencies are higher. Hence, to

Figure 8. A partially synchronous state with sparse connectivity (Msyn ⫽
60) and heterogeneity (I␴ ⫽ 0.03). A, The ﬁring rates of neurons in the
network ( ﬁlled circle) are lower than those when the neurons are uncou-
pled (open circle). The bias current varies from 0.91 to 1.09, the ﬁring rate
from 55 to 63 Hz when gsyn ⫽ 0. With gsyn ⫽ 0.1, a large fraction of neurons
have ﬁring rates close to 39 Hz, the remaining cells have lower ﬁring rates.
B, Time traces of the population synaptic ﬁeld s(t), the membrane poten-
tial V(t) of one cell and its summated synaptic drive ssyn(t). C, The
rastergram, with the cell shown in B indicated by a. D, The cross-
correlations between this cell with three other cells b, c, d indicated in C.
E, The coherence index ␬ij (␶ ⫽ 1 msec) for each of all the pairs in the
network, plotted versus the difference in the ﬁring rates 兩 fi ⫺ fj兩 of the pair.
Top, Pairs with oscillation frequencies above 34 Hz; bottom, remaining
pairs. Only pairs in the top panel show a high degree of zero-phase
synchrony. F, The histograms of ␬ij in three groups of pairs: those not
monosynaptically coupled (top), those coupled in one direction (middle),
and those coupled in both directions (bottom). The population averaged
␬(␶) function shows a steep rise for small ␶ values (G), and its derivative
has a peak at ␶ ⫽ 0 (H).

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413 6409

Figure 10. Synaptic time constant can modulate the oscillation frequency
and population synchrony. A, Slowing down the synaptic current decay
(with increasing ␶syn) decreases the mean oscillation frequency f␮ (left),
whereas the network coherence shows a peaked region centered at ␶syn ⯝
7 msec (solid circle, right). Here, to take into account the change in ﬁring
rates, the coherence index ␬ was calculated with ␶ ⫽ 0.1/f␮. For large ␶syn
values, the network coherence decreases because of the heterogeneities in
the connectivity and external drive, as can be seen by isolating each of the
two effects (dotted and dashed lines, respectively). In the absence of both,
the coherence is maximal (␬ ⫽ 1) for ␶syn ⬎ 4 msec (dash-dotted line). B,
Decreased ﬁring frequency is caused partly by the fact that with larger ␶syn,
the summated synaptic drive has a greater time average (horizontal lines)
and shows less oscillatory ﬂuctuations, thus providing an enhanced level of
tonic hyperpolarization, which counteracts the depolarizing drive of the
cells. C, Rastergram of an asynchronous network with ␶syn ⫽ 2 msec (top).
The globally coupled network of identical cells shows a two-cluster dy-
namics; thus, it is only partially synchronous (bottom).

values. Note that the heterogeneity in either the applied current
or the connectivity produces stronger effects for larger ␶syn values,
because in the lower frequency range the network is more sensi-
tive to input heterogeneities (see Fig. 1B).

On the other hand, the decrease in the network synchrony for
small ␶syn is presumably attributable to a synaptic (dynamical)
effect: inhibition should not be too fast compared to the oscilla-
tion period, so as to synchronize the network (Wang and Rinzel
1992, 1993; van Vreeswijk et al., 1995; Ermentrout, 1996). This is
illustrated in Figure 10C with ␶syn ⫽ 2 msec, where the rastergram
is quite irregular (top). This is probably related to the fact that
with global connectivity (Msyn ⫽ 100) and without heterogeneity
(I␴ ⫽ 0), the network displays two-clusters (bottom, Fig. 10D),
similar to Figure 3C. In that case, the global network synchrony
(one-cluster) was also observed with different initial conditions,
but it was very sensitive to the network heterogeneity (data not
shown).

It follows from the left and right panels of Figure 10A that a
peaked region for ␬versus ␶syn implies that the network coherence

Figure 9. Desynchronization with reduced network connectivity. Same as
Figure 8, except that Msyn ⫽ 30 instead of 60. The network dynamics is
asynchronous, as seen by the scattered distribution of ﬁring rates (A), the
disordered rastergram (C), the small ﬂuctuations of the synaptic ﬁeld (B),
and ﬂat cross-correlations (D). This asynchronous state is further charac-
terized by small values of ␬ij (E, F), the linear function of the network
averaged ␬(␶) (G), and its ﬂat derivative (H).

make a meaningful comparison, the coherence measure ␬should be
calculated with different time bin ␶when ␶syn is varied. In Figure 10A
(right), we chose to use ␶ equal to one-tenth the mean oscillation
period. It was found that the coherence index displays a peaked
region around ␶syn ⫽ 7 msec; the network synchronization is lost for
both smaller and larger ␶syn values.

The decrease in the coherence index ␬ with larger ␶syn is a
consequence of network heterogeneities. Indeed, as shown in
Figure 10A, if the dispersion in applied current is absent (I␴ ⫽ 0),
or if the connectivity is not random (Msyn ⫽ 100), ␬ is larger but
still decreases with ␶syn. But if both I␴ ⫽ 0 and Msyn ⫽ 100, ␬
(hence, the network synchrony) is now maximal for all larger ␶syn

6410 J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

Figure 11. Dependence of the network coherence on the synaptic time
constant ␶syn. A, The mean oscillation frequency as function of ␶syn is
shown with three levels of the network drive I␮ (left). The coherence index
displays a peak which is shifted to smaller ␶syn value with larger I␮ (right).
B, The ratio between the synaptic time constant ␶syn and the oscillation
period T␮ increases with ␶syn. C, The coherence index versus the ratio
␶syn/T␮. For all three I␮ values, the coherence index peaks at the same
␶syn/T␮ (⯝0.2) and decreases at smaller ratio values (Msyn ⫽ 60, I␴ ⫽ 0.03;
the coherence index ␬ was calculated with ␶ ⫽ 0.1/f␮).

is high only within a limited range of the mean oscillation fre-
quencies. This interesting observation was conﬁrmed with differ-
ent levels of the external drive I␮ (Fig. 11A). When I␮ is larger,
the oscillation frequencies are higher (left). Moreover, the maxi-
mum of ␬is located at a smaller value of ␶syn (right). The network
synchrony does not depend simply on ␶syn, but on the ratio
between ␶syn and the mean oscillation period T␮, which is an
increasing function of ␶syn (Fig. 11B). When the coherence index
is plotted versus ␶syn/T␮, it is small for small ␶syn/T␮ ratios and
peaks at ␶syn/T␮ ⯝ 0.2 for all three external excitation levels (Iapp
⫽ 1, 2, 3; Fig. 11C).
Optimal synchronization in the gamma
frequency range
That network synchronization is highest in a limited frequency
range appears to be a robust ﬁnding in our simulations. For
instance, the phenomenon was also observed when the mean
input current (I␮) was varied continuously (Fig. 12A). With stron-
ger external drive, the mean oscillation frequency increases mono-
tonically (Fig. 12A, top), but the network coherence displays high
values only for an intermediate I␮ range (Fig. 12A, bottom). In an
all-to-all network of identical neurons, the network coherence was
found to remain maximal (␬⫽ 1) for the entire I␮ range (data not
shown). Furthermore, at small I␮, heterogeneity in an all-to-all
network reduces the synchrony dramatically (with I␮ ⫽ 0.4, ␬⫽ 1,
and 0.1 for I␴ ⫽ 0 and 0.03, respectively). Thus, the decrease of
the network synchrony at smaller I␮ values is attributable to the
high network sensitivity to heterogeneities at lower frequencies
(see Fig. 1B) in addition to a decreased ␶syn/T␮ ratio (dynamical

Figure 12. High network coherence in the gamma oscillation frequency
range. A, With increasing mean drive I␮, the average oscillation frequency
monotonically increases (top), but the coherence index ␬ is large only for
intermediate I␮ values (bottom). B, Similarly, as the maximal synaptic
conductance gsyn is increased, with stronger inhibitory interactions the
average oscillation frequency f␮ monotonically decreases (top). An in-
crease in the external drive shifts the curve upwards. On the other hand,
the coherence index ␬ displays a pronounced peak for I␮ ⫽ 1, which
ﬂattens for larger I␮ values (bottom). C, The coherence index is plotted as
function of f␮ for all four curves from (A, B). The macroscopic network
coherence is observed only in the gamma range of the oscillation frequen-
cies (20–80 Hz) (Msyn ⫽ 60, I␴ ⫽ 0.03; the coherence index ␬ was
calculated with ␶ ⫽ 0.1/f␮).

effect). On the other hand, at larger I␮ (higher frequencies), the
network coherence requires tighter connectedness and our ﬁxed
Msyn ⫽ 60 may no longer be sufﬁcient (see Fig. 7A).

We also varied the coupling strength gsyn systematically, with
three different I␮ values. With stronger synaptic inhibition, the
oscillation frequency decreases monotonically (Fig. 12B, top). The
network coherence, on the other hand, shows a peaked region at
intermediate gsyn values (Fig. 12B, bottom). Again, without input
heterogeneity and coupling sparseness, the network coherence is
maximal (␬ ⫽ 1) for the entire gsyn range (data not shown).
Therefore, similar to the case of I␮ variation, the decrease of ␬ is
presumably caused by a reduced stability of the network syn-
chrony against input heterogeneity at low frequencies (large gsyn)

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413 6411

and by a lack of sufﬁciently tight connectivity (combined with a
weakened coupling strength) at high frequencies (small gsyn).

When the network coherence index is plotted against the mean
frequency, for all four curves in Figure 12, A and B, it is clear that
the network synchronization is realized only in a relatively narrow
range of oscillation frequencies (30–80 Hz; Fig. 12C). As shown
by the three curves from Figure 12B, this frequency range of high
network synchrony can be shifted by the level of external drive.
With I␮ ⫽ 2 or 3 (instead of 1), the network is more excited and
the coherence peak is located at higher frequencies, as expected,
and the peak is somewhat enlarged. However, the amplitude of
the peak is dramatically reduced (compare I␮ ⫽ 1 and 3). This can
be explained, again, by the fact that at higher frequencies, the
network synchronization requires denser connections (see Fig.
7A), whereas here Msyn ⫽ 60 is kept constant. Figure 12C dem-
onstrates that, although the optimal frequency range for synchro-
nization is not precisely deﬁned and does depend quantitatively
on network parameters and external drive, the high network
coherence is robustly limited to a frequency band that coincides
roughly with the gamma (20–80 Hz) frequency range.

DISCUSSION
We examined the emergence of synchronous gamma oscillations
in an interneuronal network model. The following conditions
were identiﬁed for the synchronizing mechanism by GABAA
synaptic inhibition. (1) The spike afterhyperpolarization of single
neurons should be above the synaptic reversal potential, so that
the effect of synaptic inputs is always hyperpolarizing. (2) The
synaptic current decay should be relatively slow, such that the
ratio between the decay time constant and the oscillation period is
not small. (3) Heterogeneities should be sufﬁciently small. (4) The
random network connectedness should be higher than a well
deﬁned minimum, which is not sensitive to the network size.
When the four conditions are fulﬁlled, a large-scale network
coherence was observed preferentially in the gamma (20–80 Hz)
frequency range, although uncoupled neurons are potentially ca-
pable of discharging in a wide range of frequencies (0–400 Hz).
Synchronization by synaptic inhibition
Rhythmogenesis in many biological central pattern generators is
based on circuits of coupled inhibitory neurons exhibiting postin-
hibitory rebound excitation (Selverston and Moulins, 1985). In
such systems, however, rhythmic patterns are usually slower than
the kinetic time constants of the inhibitory synapses, and recipro-
cally connected neurons typically ﬁre out-of-phase (Perkel and
Mulloney, 1974). More recently, it was recognized that neural
oscillations can be synchronized by mutual inhibition at zero
phase shift, provided that the synaptic kinetics is sufﬁciently slow
as compared to the oscillation period (Wang and Rinzel, 1992,
1993). Intuitively, slow synaptic decay offers the possibility for
neurons to “escape” synchronously as the synaptic inhibition
wanes below a certain threshold, thus ﬁre at the same time. A
general conclusion from this scenario is that synapses with given
temporal characteristics may be suitable to synchronizing large
neural populations in a particular oscillatory frequency range; a
major determining factor is the ratio between the synaptic time
constant and the oscillation period. Other computational works
have since shown that the mechanism of synchronization by inhi-
bition may be quite general (van Vreeswijk et al., 1995; Whitting-
ton et al., 1995; Ermentrout, 1996; Traub et al., 1996). Synchro-
nization by GABAA synapses is facilitated if the synaptic reversal
potential is more negative than the maximum spike afterhyper-

polarization. This, however,
is necessary only for the perfect
global, but not for partial, synchronization. Although fast-spiking
interneurons typically display larger AHP amplitudes than pyra-
midal cells, their measured maximal AHP is usually not below
⫺70 mV (McCormick et al., 1985; Lacaille and Williams, 1990;
Morin et al., 1995; Sik et al., 1995), hence, above the reversal
potential of ⫺75 mV for GABAA synapses (Buhl et al., 1995). On
the other hand, the time constant ␶syn of the synaptic current
determines the range of the oscillation frequencies where the
synchronization can be realized by mutual inhibition. For gamma
oscillations (⬃40 Hz), the ␶syn should be larger than 3 msec,
compatible with the estimated ␶syn (Otis and Mody, 1992). There-
fore, these requirements seem to be fulﬁlled by cortical fast-
spiking interneurons, especially the basket cells, interconnected
by GABAA synapses. On the other hand, the synchronization
mechanism does not require interneurons to be endowed with a
postinhibitory rebound property.

The network synchronization was quantiﬁed by a coherence
index that was deﬁned in terms of the zero-time cross-correlations
of spike trains. This proved to be a useful and reliable measure of
population synchrony. By contrast, population-averaged quanti-
ties like the “synaptic ﬁeld” may display signiﬁcant oscillatory
ﬂuctuations even when most neurons are in fact asynchronous, if
the size of the probed neural population is small. In that case,
however, the ﬁeld ﬂuctuations decrease with the network size and
become almost ﬂat for large networks. This observation suggests
caution in the interpretation of oscillatory local ﬁeld potential in
experimental measurements and in small-network simulations.

We studied the dependence of the network coherence on the
heterogeneity in interneuronal properties. Typically, with moder-
ate heterogeneities, coupled oscillators break down into a syn-
chronous and an asynchronous subpopulations. In our model,
asynchronous neurons in such a partially synchronous state all
have lower ﬁring frequencies than the synchronous ones. The
observed high sensitivity on the degree of heterogeneity can be
attributed partly to the large frequency–current slope of these
fast-spiking cells, so that a minor dispersion in the external drives
may result in a wide distribution of single cells’ oscillation fre-
quencies. It would be of interest to investigate whether the net-
work synchronization may become more robust in the presence of
heterogeneities and noise, if the neural connections are structured
in space (Somers and Kopell, 1995), or when an excitatory pyra-
midal population is included that reciprocally interacts with the
interneuronal population (Kopell and LeMasson, 1994; Wang et
al., 1995). Moreover, information processing in the cortex may
involve a small subset of pyramidal neurons at a time. These
pyramidal cells, by activating their common interneuron targets,
may exert localized effects on the synchronous oscillations in a
selective neural subpopulation of the cortical network.

Random connection and critical sparseness
One of our main objectives was to assess how dense synaptic
interconnections must be for the maintenance of the synchronized
network oscillations. The degree of network coherence depended
on the average number of synaptic contacts per cell, Msyn, in a
highly nonlinear fashion. A minimal Msyn value was identiﬁed,
below which the network becomes totally asynchronous. For Msyn
above its critical value, the degree of network coherence becomes
nonzero and increases with Msyn. We demonstrated that this
critical connectedness does not increase in proportion with the
number of neurons, hence, is not sensitive to the network size.
However, further analysis is needed to determine whether there is

6412 J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

a very weak (e.g., logarithmic) dependence. Such a dependence is
expected, for instance, if the required connectedness is related to
the minimal number of links for a random network to be topo-
logically connected at large scales (Erdo¨s and Re´nyi, 1960). The
existence of a small critical connectedness has also been found in
other neural network models (Barkai et al., 1990; Wang et al.,
1995), suggesting that this may be a general feature of sparsely
connected random neural networks.

Note that the actual value of this minimal connectedness de-
pends on the details of single-cell and network properties, as well
as on the cooperative dynamics under consideration. Indeed, we
found that synchronization of oscillations at higher frequencies
requires tighter interneuronal connections (Fig. 7A). Further
analyses are needed to provide a theoretical understanding of this
simulation result. For rhythmicities in the gamma frequency
range, our model network require 60 or more synaptic contacts
from an interneuron to other interneurons. This number is com-
parable with the estimated divergence/convergence factor of CA1
basket cells in the hippocampus (Sik et al., 1995).

We also demonstrated that synchronization of oscillatory neu-
rons usually cannot be attributed simply to the presence of mono-
synaptic couplings between the respective cells. The macroscopic
network synchronization is thus a truly emergent phenomenon of
large neuronal aggregates.

Frequency selection for synchronization
An important ﬁnding of the present study is that interneuronal
networks can be synchronized by GABAA synapses preferentially
within the gamma frequency range. This happens despite the wide
range (0–400 Hz) of possible single-neuron ﬁring rates. For
instance, when the synaptic time constant (␶syn), external drive
(I␮), or coupling strength (gsyn) is varied gradually, the neuronal
ﬁring frequencies change monotonically and cover a wide fre-
quency range. In all three cases, however, the degree of network
synchronization shows a relatively narrow peak within the gamma
frequency range (20–80 Hz).

This phenomenon of frequency selection may be qualitatively
understood in terms of the following three neural and network
properties: (1) the high network sensitivity to heterogeneities at low
frequencies, attributable to the steep frequency/current curve of
single neurons; (2) the minimal connectedness for the synchrony,
which is larger at higher oscillation frequencies; (3) the “dynamical
effect,” namely, network synchronization is impossible or fragile
against heterogeneities if the ratio between ␶syn and the oscillation
period T (␶syn/T) becomes too small. Hence, given ␶syn ⯝ 10 msec, if
the oscillation frequency is lower than 20 Hz (T ⬎ 50 msec), the
network coherence may be abolished by a high sensitivity to input
heterogeneity (see Fig. 1B) and by a reduced ␶syn/T ratio. On the
other hand, if the frequency is higher than 80 Hz, the synchrony may
no longer be possible because the interneuronal connectivity is not
sufﬁciently tight (see Fig. 7A). Consequently, the network can be
highly synchronized only at 20–80 Hz.

We would like to emphasize that this frequency band for
coherent oscillations cannot be determined in an absolute preci-
sion, and its quantitative limits do depend on the details of the
model. However, our results robustly demonstrated that the syn-
aptic time constant delimits a frequency band of coherent network
oscillations, and the GABAA-type synapse (with ␶syn ⯝ 10 msec)
seems especially suitable for the gamma rhythmicity. The limited
frequency range of population gamma oscillations has been ob-
served in the behaving rat (Bragin et al., 1995) and in hippocam-
pal slices (Whittington et al., 1995; Traub et al., 1996). Our

ﬁndings suggest that the synchronization mechanism by an inter-
neuronal network would be especially effective if the fast oscilla-
tions are generated in the gamma frequency range by pacemaker
neurons (Llina´s et al., 1991; McCormick et al., 1993). On the
other hand, even in the absence of pacemaker neurons, coherent
ﬁeld oscillations could still be observed in the gamma frequency
range, not because possible ﬁring rates of inhibitory interneurons
are restricted to a narrow frequency band, but because outside
this frequency range the large-scale coherence is not possible (by
this particular synaptic mechanism).
Physiological implications
Recurrent excitatory connections have long been regarded as a
possible synaptic substrate underlying correlated neural ﬁrings in
general and massively synchronous brain rhythms in particular.
Although coherent slow (epileptic) rhythmic bursting may indeed
emerge in a disinhibited pyramidal cell network (Chagnac-Amitai
and Connors, 1989; Traub et al., 1993), modeling studies suggest
that mutual excitation via the AMPA-type synapse often cannot
synchronize neural oscillations in the gamma frequency range, at
least for simple repetitive spiking neurons (Hansel et al., 1995; van
Vreeswijk, et al., 1995) (present work). An alternative mechanism
for the fast entrainment of principal cells has emerged recently.
Previous work (Bragin et al., 1995; Whittington et al., 1995; Traub
et al., 1996) and the present model suggest that networks of
interneurons are critically involved in the generation of coherent
gamma oscillations. The advantage of such “synchronizer” func-
tion of interneuronal networks is the maintenance of subthreshold
and coherent modulation of the large, sparsely connected pyra-
midal cell populations and the resulting precise timing of their
action potentials (Buzsa´ki and Chrobak, 1995; Hopﬁeld, 1995).

REFERENCES
Aika Y, Ren JQ, Kosaka K, Kosaka T (1994) Quantitative analysis of
GABA-like-immunoreactive and parvalbumin-containing neurons in
the CA1 region of the rat hippocampus using a stereological method,
the disector. Exp Brain Res 99:267–276.

Barkai E, Kanter I, Sompolinsky H (1990) Properties of sparsely con-

nected excitatory neural networks. Phys Rev A 41:590–597.

Bragin A, Jando´ G, Na´dasdy Z, Hetke J, Wise K, Buzsa´ki G (1995)
Gamma (40–100 Hz) oscillation in the hippocampus of the behaving
rat. J Neurosci 15:47–60.

Buhl EH, Cobb SR, Halasy K, Somogyi P (1995) Properties of unitary
IPSPs evoked by anatomically identiﬁed basket cells in the rat hip-
pocampus. Eur J Neurosci 7:1989–2004.

Bush PC, Douglas RJ (1991) Synchronization of bursting action potential
discharge in a model network of neocortical neurons. Neural Comput
3:19–30.

Buzsa´ki G, Chrobak JJ (1995) Temporal structure in spatially organized
neuronal ensenbles: a role for interneuronal networks. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 5:504–510.

Buzsa´ki G, Leung L, Vanderwolf CH (1983) Cellular bases of hippocam-

pal EEG in the behaving rat. Brain Res Rev 6:139–171.

Chagnac-Amitai Y, Connors BW (1989) Horizontal spread of synchro-
nized activity in neocortex and its control by GABA-mediated inhibi-
tion. J Neurophysiol 61:747–758.

Chen DF, Fetz EE (1993) Effect of synchronous neural activity on syn-

aptic transmission in primate cortex. Soc Neurosci Abstr 19:319.7.

Engel AK, Ko¨nig P, Kreiter AK, Singer W (1991) Interhemispheric syn-
chronization of oscillatory neuronal responses in cat visual cortex.
Science 252:1177–1179.

Erdo¨s P, Re´nyi A (1960) On the evolution of random graphs. MTA Mat

Kut Int Ko¨zl 5:17–61.

Ermentrout GB (1996) Type I membranes, phase resetting and syn-

chrony. Neural Comput 8:979–1001.

Freeman WJ (1975) Mass action in the nervous system. New York:

Academic.

Gerstein GL, Kiang WY (1960) An approach to the quantitative analysis

of electrophysiological data from single neurons. Biophys J 1:15–28.

Wang and Buzsa´ ki • Gamma Rhythm in an Interneuronal Network

J. Neurosci., October 15, 1996, 16(20):6402– 6413 6413

Golomb D, Wang X-J, Rinzel J (1994) Synchronization properties of
spindle oscillations in a thalamic reticular nucleus model. J Neuro-
physiol 72:1109–1126.

Gulya´s AI, Ha´jos N, Freund TF (1996) Interneurons containing calreti-
nin are specialized to control other interneurons in the rat hippocam-
pus. J Neurosci 16:3397–3411.

Hansel D, Sompolinsky H (1996) Chaos and synchrony in a model of a

hypercolumn in visual cortex. J Comput Neurosci 3:7–34.

Hansel D, Mato G, Meunier C (1995) Synchrony in excitatory neural

networks. Neural Comput 7:307–335.

Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF (1952) A quantitative description of membrane
current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve.
J Physiol (Lond) 117:500–544.

Hopﬁeld J (1995) Pattern recognition computation using action potential

timing for stimulus representation. Nature 376:33–36.

Jagadeesh B, Gray CM, Ferster D (1992) Visually evoked oscillations of
membrane potential in cells of cat visual cortex. Science 257:552–554.
Kopell N, LeMasson G (1994) Rhythmogenesis, amplitude modulation,
and multiplexing in a cortical architecture. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
91:10586–10590.

Lacaille J-C, Williams S (1990) Membrane properties of interneurons in
stratum oriens-alveus of the CA1 region of rat hippocampus in vitro.
Neuroscience 36:349–359.

Lacaille J-C, Mueller A, Kunkel DD, Schwartzkroin PA (1987) Local
circuit interactions between oriens/alveus interneurons and CA1 pyra-
midal cells in hippocampal slices: electrophysiology and morphology.
J Neurosci 7:1979–1993.

Llina´s RR, Grace AA, Yarom Y (1991) In vitro neurons in mammalian
layer 4 exhibit intrisic oscillatory activity in the 10–50 Hz

cortical
frequency range. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:897–901.

Lytton WW, Sejnowski TJ (1991) Simulations of cortical pyramidal neu-
J Neurophysiol

synchronized by

interneurons.

inhibitory

rons
66:1059–1079.

McCormick DA, Connors BW, Lighthall JW, Prince DA (1985) Com-
parative electrophysiology of pyramidal and sparsely spiny stellar neu-
rons of the neocortex. J Neurophysiol 54:782–806.

McCormick DA, Gray C, Wang Z (1993) Chattering cells: a new physi-
ological subtype which may contribute to 20–60 Hz oscillations in cat
visual cortex. Soc Neurosci Abstr 16:359.9.

Morin F, Beaulieu C, Lacaille J-C (1996) Membrane properties and
synaptic currents evoked in CA1 interneuron subtypes in rat hippocam-
pal slices. J Neurophysiol, in press.

Murthy VN, Fetz EE (1992) Coherent 25–35 Hz oscillations in the sen-
sorimotor cortex of the awake behaving monkey. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 89:5670–5674.

Otis TS, Mody I (1992) Modulation of decay kinetics and frequency of
GABAA receptor-mediated spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic cur-

rents in hippocampal neurons. Neuroscience 49:13–32.

Perkel DH, Mulloney B (1974) Motor pattern production in reciprocally
Science

postinhibitory

exhibiting

rebound.

neurons

inhibitory
185:181–183.

Perkel DH, Mulloney B, Budelli RW (1981) Quantitative methods for

predicting neuronal behavior. Neuroscience 6:823–827.

Selverston AI, Moulins M (1985) Oscillatory neural networks. Annu Rev

Physiol 47:29–48.

Sik A, Pentonnen M, Ylinen A, Buzsa´ki G (1995) Hippocampal CA1
interneurons: an in vivo intracellular labeling study. J Neurosci
15:6651–6665.

Singer W, Gray CM (1995) Visual feature integration and the temporal

correlation hypothesis. Annu Rev Neurosci 18:555–586.

Solte´sz I, Descheˆnes M (1993) Low- and high-frequency membrane po-
tential oscillations during theta activity in CA1 and CA3 pyramidal
neurons of the rat hippocampus under ketamine-xylazine anesthesia.
J Neurophysiol 70:97–116.

Somers D, Kopell N (1995) Waves and synchrony in networks of oscil-

lators of relaxation and non-relaxation type. Physica D 89:169–183.

Traub RD, Miles R, Jeffreys JGR (1993) Synaptic and intrinsic conduc-
tances shape picrotoxin-induced synchronized afterdischarges in the
guinea-pig hippocampal slice. J Physiol (Lond) 93:525–547.

Traub RD, Whittington MA, Colling SB, Buzsa´ki G, Jeffreys JGR (1996)
Analysis of gamma rhythms in the rat hippocampus in vitro and in vivo.
J Physiol (Lond), in press.

van Vreeswijk C, Abbott LF, Ermentrout GB (1995) When inhibition,
not excitation synchronizes neural ﬁring. J Comput Neurosci 1:313–322.
Wang X-J (1993) Ionic basis for intrinsic 40 Hz neuronal oscillations.

NeuroReport 5:221–224.

Wang X-J, Rinzel J (1992) Alternating and synchronous rhythms in re-

ciprocally inhibitory model neurons. Neural Comput 4:84–97.

Wang X-J, Rinzel J (1993) Spindle rhythmicity in the reticularis thalami
nucleus: synchronization among mutually inhibitory neurons. Neuro-
science 53:899–904.

Wang X-J, Golomb D, Rinzel J (1995) Emergent spindle oscillations and
intermittent burst ﬁring in a thalamic model: speciﬁc neuronal mecha-
nisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:5577–5581.

Welsh JP, Lang EJ, Sugihara I, Llina´s RR (1995) Dynamic organization
of motor control within the olivocerebellar system. Nature 374:453–457.
Whittington MA, Traub RD, Jeffreys JGR (1995) Synchronized oscilla-
tions in interneuron networks driven by metabotropic glutamate recep-
tor activation. Nature 373:612–615.

Zhang L, McBain CJ (1995) Potassium conductances underlying action
potential repolarization and afterhyperpolarization in rat CA1 hip-
pocampal interneurons. J Physiol (Lond) 488:661–672.

