Ionic mechanisms underlying human atrial action potential
properties: insights from a mathematical model

MARC COURTEMANCHE,1,2 RAFAEL J. RAMIREZ,1 AND STANLEY NATTEL1,3,4
1Research Center, Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal, Quebec H1T 1C8; De´partements
de 2Physiologie and 4Me´decine, Universite´ de Montre´al, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7; and
3Department of Pharmacology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada

Courtemanche, Marc, Rafael J. Ramirez, and Stan-
ley Nattel. Ionic mechanisms underlying human atrial ac-
tion potential properties: insights from a mathematical model.
Am. J. Physiol. 275 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 44): H301–H321,
1998.—The mechanisms underlying many important proper-
ties of the human atrial action potential (AP) are poorly
understood. Using speciﬁc formulations of the K⫹, Na⫹, and
Ca2⫹ currents based on data recorded from human atrial
myocytes, along with representations of pump, exchange, and
background currents, we developed a mathematical model of
the AP. The model AP resembles APs recorded from human
atrial samples and responds to rate changes, L-type Ca2⫹
current blockade, Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger inhibition, and varia-
tions in transient outward current amplitude in a fashion
similar to experimental recordings. Rate-dependent adapta-
tion of AP duration, an important determinant of susceptibil-
ity to atrial ﬁbrillation, was attributable to incomplete L-type
Ca2⫹ current recovery from inactivation and incomplete
delayed rectiﬁer current deactivation at rapid rates. Experi-
mental observations of variable AP morphology could be
accounted for by changes in transient outward current den-
sity, as suggested experimentally. We conclude that this
mathematical model of the human atrial AP reproduces a
variety of observed AP behaviors and provides insights into
the mechanisms of clinically important AP properties.
action potential morphology; action potential rate depen-
dence; transient outward current; L-type calcium current;
sodium/calcium exchanger

THE HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL (AP) and ionic
currents that underlie its morphology are of critical
importance to our understanding of the electrical prop-
erties of atrial tissues in normal and pathological
conditions. AP shape and underlying ionic current
densities are frequency dependent and may be modu-
lated by speciﬁc pharmacological agents (33). Their
properties are known to change during the course of
atrial arrhythmias or as a result of other cardiac
pathologies (32, 39). In addition, APs have shown
signiﬁcant variability in morphology, ranging from
triangular APs with no sustained plateaus to long APs
with deﬁnite spike-and-dome morphology, even when
recorded from cells isolated from the same atrial sam-
ple (4, 33, 54). There is a need to integrate the informa-
tion obtained from measurements of single currents to
understand complex current interactions during the AP
and their role in controlling AP morphology.

Until recently, limited data were available on the
various currents underlying the AP. New ﬁndings have
revealed important properties and signiﬁcant interspe-
cies differences. For example, the transient outward
current (Ito), present in human and rabbit atrial cells

(8, 16, 25, 47), has been shown to recover from inactiva-
tion at least two orders of magnitude faster in humans
than in rabbits (20, 47). A novel delayed rectiﬁer
current (IKur) has been identiﬁed in human atrial cells
(1, 18, 41, 48, 53) and is different from the sustained
current (Isus) observed in rabbit atrial cells (12). IKur
also differs from delayed rectiﬁers in other species that
show kinetically similar characteristics (3, 6, 29). Addi-
tional data have been obtained on the classic delayed
rectiﬁer currents (IKr and IKs)
(54, 55), the time-
independent inward rectiﬁer current (IK1) (30, 31), the
fast Na⫹ current (INa) (42), the L-type Ca2⫹ current
(ICa,L) (35) and its inactivation by voltage and intracel-
lular Ca2⫹ (26, 49), and the Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger cur-
rent (INaCa) (4).

Models of atrial cells based on animal data only have
been published (14, 36, 40, 60). Although these models
have provided valuable insights into the mechanisms
underlying AP generation in these species, the exis-
tence of signiﬁcant interspecies differences and the
amount of human data available indicate a need for an
AP model based speciﬁcally on direct measurements of
human atrial currents. To address this issue, we devel-
oped a mathematical model of the AP based on ionic
current data obtained directly in human atrial cells.
When human data were insufficient to characterize a
given atrial current fully, we supplemented with ani-
mal data and referred to existing published models of
atrial and ventricular APs (14, 36, 37, 40, 60). The most
recent published models of mammalian cardiac cells
are those of Luo and Rudy (37) (LR2 model) and
Linblad et al. (36) (LMCG model), based on measure-
ments from guinea pig ventricular cells and rabbit
atrial cells, respectively. Our model builds mostly on
the work of Luo and Rudy to develop a working model of
the human atrial AP.

Our primary goal was to develop a useful model of the
AP from which we could gain insights into experimen-
tal observations made on human atrial cells and tissues
and make predictions regarding the behavior of these
cells under previously untested conditions. Throughout
our description of the model, we clearly indicate the
sources of data used to derive model parameters, how
the parameters were obtained, and whether they were
derived directly from data or modiﬁed to improve our
representation of the AP. We then use the model to
investigate the mechanism of experimentally mea-
sured AP rate dependence, the changes in AP morphol-
ogy in the presence of pharmaceutical blockers of the
ICa,L and the Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger, and the variability in
experimentally observed AP morphology.

0363-6135/98 $5.00 Copyright r 1998 the American Physiological Society

H301

H302

Glossary

V
R
T
F
Cm
AP
V˙ max

APA

APO
APD
APD50

APD90

AF
I-V
Q10

SR
JSR

NSR
Vcell
Vi
Vup
Vrel
[X]o
[X]i
Cmdn
Trpn
Csqn
[Ca2⫹]rel

[Ca2⫹]up

[Ca2⫹]Cmdn
[Ca2⫹]Trpn
[Ca2⫹]Csqn

EX
Iion
Ist
␣x

␤x

␶x
x⬁

INa
gNa
m
h

j

Transmembrane potential
Gas constant
Temperature
Faraday constant
Membrane capacitance
Human atrial action potential
Maximal AP

upstroke

(dV/dtmax)

velocity

AP amplitude (peak AP voltage minus

diastolic voltage at onset of AP)

AP overshoot (peak AP voltage ⬎0 mV)
AP duration
APD measured from AP onset to 50% of

total APA repolarization

APD measured from AP onset to 90% of

total APA repolarization

Atrial ﬁbrillation
Current-voltage
Temperature adjustment factor, k(T) ⫽

k(T0)Q10

(T ⫺ T0 )/10

Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Junctional SR, SR release compart-

ment

Network SR, SR uptake compartment
Cell volume
Intracellular volume
SR uptake compartment volume
SR release compartment volume
Extracellular concentration of ion X
Intracellular concentration of ion X
Calmodulin, sarcoplasmic Ca2⫹ buffer
Troponin, sarcoplasmic Ca2⫹ buffer
Calsequestrin, JSR Ca2⫹ buffer
Ca2⫹ concentration in release compart-

Ca2⫹ concentration in uptake compart-

Ca2⫹-bound calmodulin concentration
Ca2⫹-bound troponin concentration
Ca2⫹-bound calsequestrin concentra-

Equilibrium potential for ion X
Total ionic current
Stimulus current
Forward rate constant for gating vari-

Backward rate constant for gating vari-

Time constant for gating variable x
Steady-state relation for gating vari-

Fast inward Na⫹ current
Maximal INa conductance
Activation gating variable for INa
Fast inactivation gating variable for

ment

ment

tion

able x

able x

able x

INa

INa

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

IK1
gK1
Ito
gto
KQ10
oa
oi
IKur
gKur
ua
ui
IKr
gKr
xr
IKs
gKs
xs
ICa,L
gCa,L
d
f

fCa

Ip,Ca
Ip,Ca(max)
INaK
INaK(max)
fNaK
␴
Km,Na(i)
Km,K(o)
INaCa
INaCa(max)
Km,Na
Km,Ca
ksat
␥
Ib,Na
gb,Na
Ib,Ca
gb,Ca
Irel
krel
u
v

w

Fn
Iup
Iup(max)
[Ca2⫹]up(max)
Itr
␶tr
Iup,leak
[Cmdn]max

[Trpn]max

tor

Inward rectiﬁer K⫹ current
Maximal IK1 conductance
Transient outward K⫹ current
Maximal Ito conductance
Q10-based temperature adjustment fac-

Activation gating variable for Ito
Inactivation gating variable for Ito
Ultrarapid delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ current
Maximal IKur conductance
Activation gating variable for IKur
Inactivation gating variable for IKur
Rapid delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ current
Maximal IKr conductance
Activation gating variable for IKur
Slow delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ current
Maximal IKs conductance
Activation gating variable for IKs
L-type inward Ca2⫹ current
Maximal ICa,L conductance
Activation gating variable for ICa,L
Voltage-dependent inactivation gating

Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation gating vari-

variable for ICa,L

able for ICa,L

Sarcoplasmic Ca2⫹ pump current
Maximal Ip,Ca
Na⫹-K⫹ pump current
Maximal INaK
Voltage-dependence parameter for INaK
[Na⫹]o-dependence parameter for INaK
[Na⫹]i half-saturation constant for INaK
[K⫹]o half-saturation constant for INaK
Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger current
INaCa scaling factor
[Na⫹]o saturation constant for INaCa
[Ca2⫹]o saturation constant for INaCa
Saturation factor for INaCa
Voltage-dependence parameter for INaCa
Background Na⫹ current
Maximal Ib,Na conductance
Background Ca2⫹ current
Maximal Ib,Ca conductance
Ca2⫹ release current from the JSR
Maximal Ca2⫹ release rate for Irel
Activation gating variable for Irel
Ca2⫹ ﬂux-dependent inactivation gat-

ing variable for Irel

Voltage-dependent inactivation gating

variable for Irel

Sarcoplasmic Ca2⫹ ﬂux signal for Irel
Ca2⫹ uptake current into the NSR
Maximal Ca2⫹ uptake rate for Iup
Maximal Ca2⫹ concentration in NSR
Ca2⫹ transfer current from NSR to JSR
Ca2⫹ transfer time constant
Ca2⫹ leak current from the NSR
Total calmodulin concentration in myo-

plasm

plasm

Slow inactivation gating variable for

Total troponin concentration in myo-

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

H303

Total calsequestrin concentration in

Ca2⫹ half-saturation constant for cal-

Table 1. Model constants

Deﬁnition

Value

8.3143 J·K⫺1·mol⫺1
310 K
96.4867 C/mmol
100 pF
20,100 µm3
13,668 µm3

Gas constant
Temperature
Faraday constant
Membrane capacitance
Cell volume
Intracellular volume
SR uptake compartment volume 1,109.52 µm3
SR release compartment volume 96.48 µm3
Extracellular K⫹ concentration 5.4 mM
Extracellular Na⫹ concentration 140 mM
1.8 mM
Extracellular Ca2⫹ concentra-

[Csqn]max

Km,Cmdn

Km,Trpn

Km,Csqn

Vrest

JSR

modulin

nin

questrin

Ca2⫹ half-saturation constant for tropo-

Ca2⫹ half-saturation constant for calse-

Resting membrane potential

MODEL DESCRIPTION

General

We model the cell membrane as a capacitor connected
in parallel with variable resistances and batteries
representing the ionic channels and driving forces. The
time derivative of the membrane potential V (with the
assumption of an equipotential cell) is given by

dV
dt

⫽

⫺(Iion ⫹ Ist)

Cm

(1)

where Iion and Ist are the total
ionic current and
stimulus current ﬂowing across the membrane and Cm
is the total membrane capacitance. The total ionic
current is given by
Iion ⫽ INa ⫹ IK1 ⫹ Ito ⫹ IKur ⫹ IKr ⫹ IKs ⫹ ICa,L

(2)

⫹ Ip,Ca ⫹ INaK ⫹ INaCa ⫹ Ib,Na ⫹ Ib,Ca

The ionic and pump currents, along with the handling
of intracellular Ca2⫹ concentration ([Ca2⫹]i) by the
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) system, are described in
Membrane Currents. The model keeps track of the
[Ca2⫹]i as well as intracellular concentrations of Na⫹
([Na⫹]i) and K⫹ ([K⫹]i). No extracellular cleft spaces are
included in the model (extracellular ion concentrations
are ﬁxed). Figure 1 shows a schematic representation of
the currents, pumps, and exchangers included in the
model. Cm is taken to be 100 pF. The length and

R
T
F
Cm
Vcell
Vi
Vup
Vrel
[K⫹]o
[Na⫹]o
[Ca2⫹]o

gNa
gK1
gto
gKr
gKs
gCa,L
gb,Ca
gb,Na
INaK(max)
INaCa(max)
Ip,Ca(max)
Iup(max)
KQ10

␥

Km,Na(i)

Km,K(o)

Km,Na

Km,Ca

ksat
krel
Kup

tion

Maximal INa conductance
Maximal IK1 conductance
Maximal Ito conductance
Maximal IKr conductance
Maximal IKs conductance
Maximal ICa,L conductance
Maximal Ib,Ca conductance
Maximal Ib,Na conductance
Maximal INaK
Maximal INaCa
Maximal Ip,Ca
Maximal Iup
Temperature scaling factor for

IKur and Ito kinetics

Voltage dependence parameter

[Na⫹]i half-saturation constant

[K⫹]o half-saturation constant

[Na⫹]o half-saturation constant

[Ca2⫹]o half-saturation constant

Saturation factor for INaCa
Maximal release rate for Irel
[Ca2⫹]i half-saturation constant

for Iup

for INaCa

for INaK

for INaK

for INaCa

for INaCa

[Ca2⫹]up(max) Maximal Ca2⫹ concentration in

uptake compartment

Total calmodulin concentration

[Cmdn]max

[Trpn]max

[Csqn]max

Km,Cmdn

Km,Trpn

Km,Csqn

Total troponin concentration in

in myoplasm

myoplasm

Total calsequestrin concentra-
tion in SR release compart-
ment

[Ca2⫹]i half-saturation constant

for calmodulin

[Ca2⫹]i half-saturation constant

[Ca2⫹]rel half-saturation con-

for troponin

stant for Iup

7.8 nS/pF
0.09 nS/pF
0.1652 nS/pF
0.0294 nS/pF
0.129 nS/pF
0.1238 nS/pF
0.00113 nS/pF
0.000674 nS/pF
0.60 pA/pF
1,600 pA/pF
0.275 pA/pF
0.005 mM/ms
3

0.35

10 mM

1.5 mM

87.5 mM

1.38

0.1
30 ms⫺1
0.00092 mM

15 mM

0.05 mM

0.07 mM

10 mM

0.00238 mM

0.0005 mM

0.8 mM

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of currents, pumps, and exchangers
included in model. Cell
includes 3 intracellular compartments:
myoplasm, sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) release compartment [junc-
tional SR (JSR)], and SR uptake compartment [network SR (NSR)].
See Glossary for deﬁnitions.

diameter of the cell are set to 100 and 16 µm, respec-
tively. Unless otherwise noted, physical units are as
follows: time (t) is in milliseconds, V is in millivolts, Cm
is in picofarads, current density is in picoamperes per
picofarad, conductance is in nanosiemens per pico-
farad, and concentrations are in millimoles per liter.
Physical parameters for the model cell are given in
Table 1. Cell compartment volumes are identical to
those used by Luo and Rudy (37).

A modiﬁed Euler method is used to integrate Eq. 1
with a ﬁxed time step ⌬t ⫽ 0.005 ms (see APPENDIX,

H304

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

Numerical Integration). All simulations were per-
formed on a local workstation (SGI Indigo 2XZ R4400)
using double-precision arithmetic. A description of the
model current formulations and their general math-
ematical representations are given below. A detailed
listing of all equations and parameters can be found in
the APPENDIX.

Membrane Currents

Fast Na⫹ current. The model implements INa as a
modiﬁcation of the widely used Ebihara-Johnson model
(15) proposed by Luo and Rudy (37). The current is
given by

gNa ⫽ 7.8

Fig. 3. Current-voltage (I-V ) relationships of major currents in
model with corresponding experimental data. Model curves (solid
lines, dashed line without symbols for INa) represent peak current
measured during 3,000-ms voltage steps to various potentials from a
holding potential of ⫺80 mV. Experimental data sets (dashed lines
with symbols) are scaled so that maximum current for a given
experimental I-V curve matches current amplitude of corresponding
model I-V curve at that potential. Data sources and scaling factors
are as follows: Li and Nattel (35) for ICa,L scaled by 0.38, Feng et al.
(19) for IKur scaled by 0.81 and Ito scaled by 1.2, Wang et al. (55) for IKs
scaled by 3.0 and IKr scaled by 0.38. Refer to original studies for exact
experimental voltage-clamp protocols used. Experimental I-V curves
for IKur and Ito were shifted 10 mV negative before they were scaled,
matching voltage shift introduced in model to account for known
effects of divalent cations used experimentally to inhibit ICa,L (13, 28).
Experimental I-V data for IK (55) were transformed to pA/pF with use
of Cm ⫽ 100 pF before scaling was performed. No experimental data
are shown for INa.

given by

IK1 ⫽

gK1(V ⫺ EK)

1 ⫹ exp [0.07(V ⫹ 80)]

,

gK1 ⫽ 0.09

(4)

We assume no temperature dependence of the inward
rectiﬁer current on the basis of preliminary experimen-
tal data. The current is assumed to reverse at EK, with
a voltage-dependent conductance and no additional
dependence on outward K⫹ concentration ([K⫹]o). Koumi
et al. (30, 31) reported measurements of IK1 from
human atrial cells. When incorporated in the model,
their large conductance value of 0.25 nS/pF at EK
yielded a low input membrane resistance (⬃40 M⍀ for

INa ⫽ gNam 3hj(V ⫺ ENa),

(3)
Using the formulation of Luo and Rudy, we ﬁnd that the
model steady-state inactivation and its time constants
are shifted 20 mV positive compared with the data of
Sakakibara et al. (42). However, the formulation for
steady-state inactivation is consistent with more recent
human atrial steady-state inactivation data from
Schneider et al. (46) (see DISCUSSION for a detailed
evaluation of available human atrial data). Maximum
Na⫹ conductance (gNa) was adjusted to produce an
appropriate value for the AP amplitude (APA) and
maximal upstroke velocity (V˙ max). We use gNa ⫽ 7.8
nS/pF, which is ⬃1.3 times the temperature-adjusted
value (with the assumption of Q10 ⫽ 3) reported by
Sakakibara et al. Figure 2 shows the steady-state
activation and inactivation curves, as well as time
constants, used in the model. Data from Sakakibara et
al., shifted by the amounts described above and tem-
perature corrected, are overlaid on the model curves.
For activation time constants, temperature-adjusted
data from Schneider et al. are shown. The peak current-
voltage (I-V) relationship for INa is displayed in Fig. 3.
No experimental I-V curve was included, because avail-
able data (19, 42, 46), as a result of equal intra- and
extracellular Na⫹ concentrations, display a nonphysi-
ological reversal potential for INa close to 0 mV.

Inward rectiﬁer K⫹ current. The model implements
IK1 on the basis of available current data and resting
membrane resistance measurements. The current is

Fig. 2. Model representation of param-
eters describing fast Na⫹ current.
Steady-state activation and inactiva-
tion curves (A) and gating variable time
constants (B) are shown. Experimental
data from Sakakibara et al. (42) (m⬁,
h⬁j⬁, ␶h, ␶j) and Schneider et al. (46)
(␶m), voltage shifted (⫹20 mV) and tem-
perature corrected (Q10 ⫽ 3), are in-
cluded for comparison. Experimental
steady-state relationships are lines ﬁt-
ted by Sakakibara et al. to their experi-
mental data.

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

H305

Transient outward and ultrarapid rectiﬁer K⫹ cur-
rents. The model implements Ito and IKur on the basis of
data from our laboratory (20, 53). The currents are
given by

3oi(V ⫺ EK),

gto ⫽ 0.1652

Ito ⫽ gtooa
IKur ⫽ gKurua

3ui(V ⫺ EK),

gKur ⫽ 0.005 ⫹

0.05

1 ⫹ exp 3(V ⫺ 15)
⫺13 4

(5)

(6)

Fig. 4. I-V relationships for IK1 and INaK obtained from model. Sum of
instantaneous time-independent membrane currents (Iv) is also
shown. For INaK, the amplitude of which depends on Na⫹ and K⫹
concentrations, resting concentrations from Table 2 are used.

a 100-pF cell). We decreased IK1 conductance to
compensate for this using gK1 ⫽ 0.09 nS/pF. When the
latter is used, input resistance calculated for a voltage
step from ⫺80 to ⫺90 mV is ⬃174 M⍀, closer to
experimentally recorded values (e.g., ⬃150 M⍀ in Ref.
52). However, there is a large range of measured values
for the input resistance of human atrial cells that may
reﬂect differences in the isolation procedure and its
effect on isolation-sensitive currents such as IK1. The
I-V relationship of IK1 is shown in Fig. 4.

Both currents share similar activation kinetics but
differ in their inactivation properties. Ito has fairly
rapid inactivation kinetics; IKur displays only partial
slow inactivation. Currents were modeled at room
temperature, and Q10 ⫽ 2.2 was used to adjust their
kinetics to 37°C (53). Current amplitudes were ad-
justed to match AP morphology. Figure 5 shows steady-
state activation, inactivation, and corresponding time
constants for IKur, along with experimental data from
our laboratory (53). Figure 5 shows similar results for
Ito. All model ﬁts shown in Fig. 5 are shifted 10 mV
negative for computations to account for the known
positive shift (13, 28) induced by divalent cations such
as Cd2⫹, which was used experimentally to block ICa,L.
The peak I-V relationship of both currents, along with
scaled experimental I-V curves from Feng et al. (19),
are shown in Fig. 3. Figure 6 displays traces for IKur and

Fig. 5. Model representation of param-
eters describing ultrarapid delayed rec-
tiﬁer current (A and B) and transient
outward current (C and D). Steady-
state activation and inactivation curves
(A and C) and gating variable time
constants (B and D) are shown. Experi-
mental data from Wang et al. (53), to
which model relations are ﬁtted, are
included for comparison.

H306

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

Fig. 6. IKur and Ito generated by model in response to voltage-clamp
steps. Results are shown for combined currents (A), Ito alone (B), and
IKur alone (C). From resting state, model is held at ⫺80 mV for 1,000
ms, followed by potential steps to ⫺20, 0, and ⫹20 mV. Experimental
recordings of IKur ⫹ Ito, from Wang et al. (55), are included for
comparison (dashed lines in A). Experimental recordings were scaled
using Cm ⫽ 100 pF to match peak amplitude of model trace at
⫹20 mV.

Fig. 8. IKr and IKs generated by model in response to voltage-clamp
steps. Results are shown for combined currents (A), IKs alone (B), and
IKr alone (C). From resting state, model is held at ⫺80 mV for 1,000
ms, followed by potential steps to ⫺20, 0, and ⫹20 mV. Experimental
recordings of IKr and IKs, from Wang et al. (55), are included for
comparison (dashed lines in B and C). With use of Cm ⫽ 100 pF to
obtain units of pA/pF, experimental recordings were further scaled by
a factor of 3.5 (IKs) and 0.47 (IKr) to match peak amplitude of model
currents at ⫹20 mV.

Ito in response to voltage-clamp steps from a holding
potential of ⫺80 mV. The traces of Ito ⫹ IKur show typical
rapid inactivation of Ito followed by a sustained out-
ward current carried by IKur. The combined model
current traces are overlaid with scaled experimental
recordings from Wang et al. (53).

Rapid and slow delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ currents. The
model implements the two components of the classic
delayed rectiﬁer, IKr and IKs, on the basis of data from
our laboratory (54, 55). The currents are given by

,

gKr ⫽ 0.0294

(7)

IKr ⫽

gKrxr(V ⫺ EK)
1 ⫹ exp 1V ⫹ 15
22.4 2
2(V ⫺ EK),

IKs ⫽ gKsxs

gKs ⫽ 0.129

(8)
Both currents have only a single activation gate, al-
though IKs activation uses a squared (x2) activation
gate, as suggested in previous studies (61). Partial
inactivation of IKr is observed in some experiments (55)
but is not included in this model. Figure 7 shows the
steady-state activation curves and time constants for
both delayed rectiﬁer currents as well as experimen-
tally measured time constants. The steady-state activa-
tion parameters are taken directly from ﬁts to experi-
mental data presented by Wang et al. (55). Some
experimental evidence (27, 43, 45) suggests that activa-
tion and deactivation of IKs may be multiexponential. To

account for these measurements and obtain results
consistent with the overall experimental literature, the
model computations use time constants for IKs activa-
tion that are one-half the ﬁtted values shown in Fig. 7.
In addition, observations of slow deactivation of the
delayed rectiﬁer at negative potentials (27, 43) were
considered by using asymmetric relationships to repre-
sent the dependence of ␶x(r) and ␶x(s) on V. Current
amplitudes were adjusted to match AP morphology.
The I-V relationships of both currents, along with
scaled experimental I-V curves from Wang et al., are
shown in Fig. 3. Figure 8 displays traces for IKr and IKs
in response to 3,000-ms voltage-clamp steps from a
holding potential of ⫺80 mV. The model traces are
overlaid with scaled experimental recordings from Wang
et al. The combined model IK trace shows rapid and
slow activation phases linked to activation of IKr and
IKs, respectively.

L-type Ca2⫹ current. The model implements the slow
inward Ca2⫹ current on the basis of previous models
and data from human atrial cells (35, 37, 40, 49). The
current is given by

ICa,L ⫽ gCa,Ld f fCa(V ⫺ 65.0),

(9)
Our formulation follows that of Luo and Rudy (37) and
includes voltage-dependent activation and inactivation
gates, as well as a Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation gate.
The steady-state activation relation was ﬁt to human

gCa,L ⫽ 0.1238

Fig. 7. Model representation of param-
eters describing rapid and slow delayed
rectiﬁer currents. A: steady-state activa-
tion curves; B: gating variable time
constants. Experimental data from
Wang et al. (55), to which model rela-
tions are ﬁtted, are included for com-
parison (open symbols in B).

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

H307

Fig. 9. Model representation of param-
eters describing ICa,L. A: steady-state
activation curves; B: gating variable
time constants. Experimental data from
Li and Nattel (35), to which steady-state
relationships are ﬁtted, are included
for comparison (open symbols in A).

atrial data from Li and Nattel (35) (Fig. 9) and hence
differs slightly from that of Luo and Rudy and Rasmus-
son et al. (40) by providing a better ﬁt to the slower
onset of activation observed in the experimental data.
Because of the absence of activation time constant
measurements from human atrial myocytes, we re-
tained the activation time constant formulation re-
ported previously (36, 37, 40). Steady-state voltage-
dependent inactivation data from Li and Nattel were
accurately ﬁt by the relation of Rasmusson et al. (40)
(Fig. 9). Hence, we retained their formulation in our
model. Our formulation of steady-state Ca2⫹-dependent
inactivation is slightly modiﬁed from that of Luo and
Rudy to better match the Ca2⫹ transient and reproduce
the extent of Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation of ICa,L ob-
served experimentally. A ﬁxed intrinsic time depen-
dence (␶f,Ca ⫽ 2 ms) is incorporated into the fCa gate, as
reported by Friedman et al. (21, 22) (see SR Ca2⫹
storage and release), to better reproduce the time
course of Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation of ICa,L.

In experiments on human atrial cells, Sun et al. (49)
showed two fast Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation time con-
stants for ICa,L, on the order of 10–40 and 300–400 ms,
respectively, at room temperature. In addition, when
monovalent cations or Sr2⫹ was used as charge carrier,
a very slow voltage-dependent process was apparent
with inactivation time constants in the range of 600–
800 ms at room temperature. Our ability to reproduce
these results is dependent on our formulation of the
current, which implements two inactivation mecha-
nisms for ICa,L. We have selected the time constant for

voltage-dependent inactivation in our model to match
qualitatively the measurements of Sun et al. The
voltage dependence of the time constant uses the form
proposed by Luo and Rudy (37), but the magnitude of
the time constant is scaled to better agree with the data
of Sun et al. The time constant at 0 mV is ⬃240 ms in
the model, which is within the experimentally mea-
sured range with the assumption of a threefold tempera-
ture correction to 37°C. Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation is
mediated directly through the fCa gate. We rely on the
Ca2⫹ transient to drive Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation,
with its time constants being set indirectly through the
dynamics of Ca2⫹ release and reuptake. This provides
rapid inactivation of ICa,L on a time scale on the order of
10 ms. The model does not account for the existence of a
slower Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation, as identiﬁed by
Sun et al. (see DISCUSSION). The I-V relationships for
ICa,L, along with a scaled experimental I-V curve from
Li and Nattel (35), are shown in Fig. 3. Figure 10A
displays model traces for ICa,L in response to voltage-
clamp steps from a holding potential of ⫺80 mV. The
current traces exhibit rapid activation, followed by two
distinct inactivation time scales. Rapid inactivation
mediated by intracellular Ca2⫹ inactivates a large
fraction of the current soon after the onset of the voltage
step and is followed by a slower voltage-dependent
inactivation. The model response after a voltage-clamp
step to 0 mV is compared with a scaled averaged
experimental recording from Sun et al. in Fig. 10B.

Na⫹-K⫹ pump. Our formulation of the Na⫹-K⫹ pump
follows the model of Luo and Rudy (37). The amplitude

Fig. 10. A: ICa,L generated by model in
response to voltage-clamp steps. From
resting state, model is held at ⫺80 mV
for 1,000 ms, followed by potential steps
to ⫺40 to ⫹20 mV. B: model response at
a voltage-clamp potential of ⫹20 mV,
overlaid with experimental data from
Sun et al.
(49). Experimental data
represent an average experimental
trace from 7 voltage-clamp current
recordings to ⫹20 mV. Peak ampli-
tude of normalized recording was
scaled to match model peak amplitude
at ⫹20 mV.

H308

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

of the pump current [INaK(max)] is adjusted to maintain
stable intracellular ion concentrations at rest (37, 59).
The pump current is given by

INaK ⫽ INaK(max)fNaK

1

1 ⫹ 5Km,Na(i)/[Na⫹]i61.5

·

[K⫹]o

[K⫹]o ⫹ Km,K(o)

,

INaK(max) ⫽ 0.6

(10)

proaches have been used extensively in previous AP
models (37, 59). The background currents are given by

Ib,Ca ⫽ gb,Ca(V ⫺ ECa),
Ib,Na ⫽ gb,Na(V ⫺ ENa),

gb,Ca ⫽ 0.00113
gb,Na ⫽ 0.000674 (13)
Ca2⫹ pump current. A sarcolemmal Ca2⫹ pump is
included in the model to maintain [Ca2⫹]i at physiologi-
cal levels. The pump current formulation (37, 40) is
given by

(12)

The voltage dependence of INaK at resting [Na⫹]i ([K⫹]o
is ﬁxed at 5.4 mM in the model) is shown in Fig. 4.

Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger. The exchanger current follows
the revised formulation of Luo and Rudy (37). The
exchanger current is given by

Ip,Ca ⫽ Ip,Ca(max)

[Ca2⫹]i

0.0005 ⫹ [Ca2⫹]i

,

(14)

Ip,Ca(max) ⫽ 0.275

INaCa ⫽

INaCa(max)5exp [␥VF/(RT)][Na⫹]i

3[Ca2⫹]o ⫺ exp [(␥ ⫺ 1)VF/(RT)][Na⫹]o

3[Ca2⫹]i6

(K m,Na

3 ⫹ [Na⫹]o

3)(Km,Ca ⫹ [Ca2⫹]o) · 51 ⫹ ksat exp [(␥ ⫺ 1)VF/(RT)]6

,

INaCa(max) ⫽ 1600.0

(11)

As with INaK, the amplitude is adjusted to maintain
stable physiological intracellular ion concentrations at
rest (Table 2). Figure 11 shows the voltage dependence
of the exchanger current at resting [Na⫹]i for two
values of [Ca2⫹]i: at rest ([Ca2⫹]i ⫽ 0.1 µM) and near
peak Ca2⫹ release concentration ([Ca2⫹]i ⫽ 1 µM). The
downward shift in the curve is associated with a shift
from Ca2⫹ entry to Ca2⫹ extrusion mode at depolarized
potentials as Ca2⫹ concentration increases.

Background Ca2⫹ and Na⫹ currents. The Ca2⫹ leak
current is adjusted to maintain a stable [Ca2⫹]i at rest.
The Na⫹ leak current is adjusted along with INaK to
maintain stable [Na⫹]i and [K⫹]i at rest. Both ap-

Figure 4 shows the total time-independent I-V relation-
ship for the model, which includes the background
currents, IK1, and the pump and exchanger currents.

SR Ca2⫹ storage and release. SR Ca2⫹ uptake and
release are implemented using a two-compartment
model, as reported by Luo and Rudy (37). Intracellular
Ca2⫹ is taken up into an SR uptake compartment
[network SR (NSR), 5.52% of cell volume] coupled to a
release compartment [junctional SR (JSR), 0.48% of
cell volume]. Uptake is [Ca2⫹]i dependent and includes
a leak from the uptake compartment back into the
intracellular space. The main currents (in mM/ms)
involved in SR Ca2⫹ handling are given by

Table 2. State variables of the AP model at rest

Irel ⫽ krelu2vw([Ca2⫹]rel ⫺ [Ca2⫹]i),

krel ⫽ 30 (15)

State Variable

Vrest
h
d
xr
[Na⫹]i
[K⫹]i
[Ca2⫹]rel
oi
ui
[Cmdn ⫺Ca2⫹]i
[Csqn ⫺Ca2⫹]i
v
m
j
f
xs
[Ca2⫹]i
[Ca2⫹]up
oa
ua
fCa
[Trpn ⫺Ca2⫹]i
u
w

Resting Value

⫺8.12 ⫻101
9.65 ⫻10⫺1
1.37 ⫻10⫺4
3.29 ⫻10⫺5
1.12 ⫻101
1.39 ⫻102

1.49

9.99 ⫻10⫺1
9.99 ⫻10⫺1
2.05 ⫻10⫺3

6.51
1.00

2.91 ⫻10⫺3
9.78 ⫻10⫺1
9.99 ⫻10⫺1
1.87 ⫻10⫺2
1.02 ⫻10⫺4

1.49

3.04 ⫻10⫺2
4.96 ⫻10⫺3
7.75 ⫻10⫺1
1.18 ⫻10⫺2

0.00

9.99 ⫻10⫺1

Fig. 11. I-V relationships for INaCa obtained from model. Current
amplitude depends on Na⫹ and Ca2⫹ concentrations. Resting concen-
tration shown in Table 2 is used for [Na⫹]i. Two different Ca2⫹
concentrations are used to illustrate shift from reverse to forward
exchanger modes at plateau potentials in response to an increase in
intracellular Ca2⫹.

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

H309

,

␶tr ⫽ 180

(16)

[Ca2⫹]up ⫺ [Ca2⫹]rel

Itr ⫽

␶tr
Iup(max)

Iup ⫽

1 ⫹ (Kup/[Ca2⫹]i)

,

Iup(max) ⫽ 0.005 (17)

Triggering of Ca2⫹ release from the JSR is modiﬁed
from the original formulation of Luo and Rudy (37)
following the work of Friedman et al. (21, 22). Release
from the JSR is triggered by Ca2⫹ ﬂux into the cell with
emphasis placed on ﬂux through the closely coupled
ICa,L and JSR release channels. Release is controlled by
two Ca2⫹ ﬂux-dependent activation and inactivation
gates, u and v. Steady-state activation and inactivation
curves for u and v, as well as their respective time
constants, are shown in Fig. 12. This trigger mecha-
nism results in a transient activation of the SR Ca2⫹
release current in response to a suprathreshold Ca2⫹
ﬂux. Friedman (21) showed that, for AP simulations,
this formulation is equivalent to using a threshold on
[Ca2⫹]i entry, as done by Luo and Rudy (37). The
formulation used here has the advantage of being a
continuous analytic representation, thereby avoiding
possible discontinuities and artifacts in the cellular
response near the threshold for Ca2⫹ release (21). The
voltage-dependent inactivation gate w contributes to
the decrease in SR release current amplitude at posi-
tive potentials, when membrane voltage approaches the
ICa,L reversal potential. The steady-state voltage-depen-
dent inactivation curve for w and its time constant are also
shown in Fig. 12. Detailed expressions for the ﬂux compu-

Fig. 13. Comparison of model-generated (solid lines) and experimen-
tally measured (dashed lines) Ca2⫹ transients in response to 150-ms
voltage-clamp pulses to 0 mV applied at a frequency of 0.1 and 1 Hz.
Experimental data are based on published measurements of Hatem
et al. (26) in human atrial myocytes.

tations and gating variables are given in the APPENDIX.
In a recent experimental study on human atrial myo-
cytes, Hatem et al. (26) recorded Ca2⫹ transients in
response to 150-ms voltage-clamp pulses to 0 mV
applied at frequencies of 0.1 and 1 Hz. Figure 13 shows
a comparison of experimental data from Hatem et al.
and model-generated Ca2⫹ transients elicited using the
same voltage-clamp protocol. A detailed comparison of
model and experimental Ca2⫹ transient morphologies
can be found in the DISCUSSION.

Myoplasmic and SR Ca2⫹ buffers. Ca2⫹ buffering
within the cytoplasm is mediated by troponin and cal-
modulin. Ca2⫹ buffering in the release compartment is
mediated by calsequestrin. In particular, calsequestrin
is essential in providing sufficient Ca2⫹ stores for re-

Fig. 12. Model representation of param-
eters describing Ca2⫹-induced Ca2⫹ re-
lease. Steady-state activation and inac-
tivation curves (A) and corresponding
time constants (B) for Ca2⫹ ﬂux-depen-
dent gating variables u and v are shown.
C: steady-state inactivation curve and
corresponding inactivation time con-
stant for voltage-dependent gating vari-
able w.

H310

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

lease within the limited JSR volume. Buffers are consid-
ered at equilibrium throughout our simulations, and
incoming Ca2⫹ in the myoplasm and JSR compartments
is instantaneously equilibrated into free and buffer-
bound fractions (see APPENDIX for computational meth-
ods). Buffer concentrations and binding constants are
given in Table 1 and follow the models of Luo and Rudy
(37) and Rasmusson et al. (40).

Table 3. AP characteristics and their rate dependence

Time, ms

AP Property

5,000

1,000

APD90, ms
APD50, ms
APA, mV
V˙ max, V/s
APO, mV

302
183
106
216
25

297
178
106
216
25

500

281
143
104
212
25

300

238
113
88
132
12

RESULTS

Resting Properties

The model has a stable resting potential near ⫺81
mV. All intracellular concentrations are stable at rest
with [Ca2⫹]i ⫽ 0.1 µM, [Na⫹]i ⫽ 11.2 mM, and [K⫹]i ⫽
139.0 mM. As stated earlier, the resting input resistance
measured as the current change from ⫺80 to ⫺90 mV is
⬃174 M⍀. The ﬁrst 100-ms period of Fig. 14 shows the
balance of membrane currents in diastole during stimula-
tion at 1,000 ms. During the diastolic phase the steady
state involves a balance between the pump and ex-
changer currents, the background currents, and IK1.
Model AP

Figure 14 shows a model AP generated during stimu-
lation at 1,000 ms in response to 2-ms pulses of 2-nA
amplitude (twice diastolic threshold). The time course
of membrane currents during the AP is also shown in
Fig. 14. AP duration (APD) at 50 and 90% repolariza-
tion (APD50 and APD90), APA, AP overshoot (APO), and
V˙ max are reported in Table 3. The AP generated with the
control parameters exhibits a spike-and-dome morphol-
ogy commonly observed in human atrial AP recordings.
This morphology is similar to experimentally recorded
spike-and-dome APs reported by Benardeau et al. (4)

and Wang et al. (53). Intracellular Ca2⫹ dynamics
during the AP are shown in Fig. 15.
AP Rate Dependence

Rate dependence of APD and AP refractoriness is an
essential property of atrial cells that is central to our
understanding of excitability and propagation patterns
in the atria, particularly during reentrant arrhyth-
mias. Table 3 summarizes the main properties of the
model APs at various pacing periods. Figure 16 dis-
plays model APs, after 12 s of pacing, for various
stimulation periods ranging from 1,000 to 300 ms.
There is no signiﬁcant increase in APD at ⬎1,000 ms.
This is in agreement with data from Fermini et al. (20)
that showed no change in AP morphology and APD on
changing the stimulation period abruptly from 10 to
1 s. Larger relative rate-dependent changes in APD are
measured withAPD50 than withAPD90, as in experimental
preparations (20, 32). Figure 16 also showsAPs obtained in

Fig. 14. Model action potential during stimulation at 1 Hz. Mem-
brane potential and corresponding ionic currents are shown. Model
was stimulated from rest at a period of 1,000 ms. Model output from
12th action potential is depicted.

Fig. 15. Model action potential and intracellular Ca2⫹ dynamics
during stimulation at 1 Hz. Membrane potential, intracellular Ca2⫹
ﬂux (trigger for Ca2⫹ release), intracellular, uptake, and release
compartment Ca2⫹ concentrations, and uptake, transfer, and release
Ca2⫹ ﬂuxes are shown. Model was stimulated from rest at a fre-
quency of 1 Hz. Model output from 12th action potential is depicted.

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

H311

similar stage during the AP. For this reason, a small
rate-dependent change in IK amplitude may have signiﬁ-
cant effects during late repolarization, when IK is the
dominant repolarizing current.

To better ascertain the relative importance of IK and
ICa,L in AP rate adaptation, we use a simulation protocol
where the rate-induced changes in a speciﬁc current
are identiﬁed and implemented individually to deter-
mine its speciﬁc contributions to AP rate dependence.
We begin with a simulation of pacing at 1,000 ms that is
interrupted just before the onset of a stimulus. Before
continuation of the simulation and application of the
scheduled stimulus, the values of the gating variables
for the current under study are substituted with their
values just before a stimulus during pacing at 300 ms.
When the simulation is continued and the scheduled
stimulus is applied, the resulting AP displays the
rate-adaptation properties associated with the current
under study, the state of which has been reset to its
value during rapid pacing. We have carried out this
procedure to examine the rate-dependent effect of ICa,L
(via the d and f gating variables), IKr (via the xr gating
variable), IKs (via the xs gating variable), and [Ca2⫹]i
(via [Ca2⫹]i, [Ca2⫹]up, [Ca2⫹]rel, and the u, v, and w
gating variables) on the AP.

Figure 17 displays the APs after 12 s of pacing at
1,000 and 300 ms, along with the APs arising from
isolating the rate-adaptation effects of ICa,L, IK (IKr ⫹
IKs), and ICa,L ⫹ IK. We note that when the effect of
either IKr or IKs alone was examined, the observed
change in APD90 was ⬃50% of the total reduction seen
with both currents combined (IK in Fig. 17). Also, the
effect on APD90 of [Ca2⫹]i and ICa,L combined was
similar to that of ICa,L alone, which is why the results for
[Ca2⫹]i were not included in Fig. 17. The limited role of
[Ca2⫹]i at fast pacing rates may reﬂect the opposing
effects of a higher resting [Ca2⫹]i and a lower Ca2⫹
transient amplitude on ICa,L inactivation. Our ﬁrst

Fig. 17. Role of ICa,L and IK in producing rate-dependent shortening
of action potential on reducing pacing period from 1,000 to 300 ms.
Steady-state action potentials during pacing at 1,000 and 300 ms are
shown. In addition, action potentials resulting from rate adaptation
of ICa,L alone, IK (IKr ⫹ IKs) alone, and ICa,L ⫹ IK are shown. See
RESULTS for a detailed description of numerical simulation procedure.
Combination of ICa,L and IK rate adaptation is sufficient to explain full
extent of rate-dependent action potential shortening on reduction of
pacing period from 1,000 to 300 ms.

Fig. 16. Rate dependence of action potential duration and morphol-
ogy. Top left: model action potentials recorded after 12 s of pacing at
various basic cycle lengths (BCLs). Action potential duration de-
creases as BCL decreases from 1 to 0.3 s. Top right: experimental
recordings of action potentials obtained at pacing periods of 1, 0.6,
and 0.3 s (data from Ref. 56). Bottom panels: currents obtained during
model action potentials at BCLs of 1 and 0.3 s. Currents during 2
consecutive action potentials are shown at BCL of 0.3 s to facilitate
comparison to currents at BCL of 1 s.

a tissue preparation at stimulation periods of 1,000, 600,
and 300 ms (56). The experimentally observed changes in
APD and AP morphology with stimulation rate are
qualitatively similar to those observed in the model.

The mechanism underlying APD changes may be
investigated by examining the detailed current traces
for APs at stimulation periods of 1,000 and 300 ms
depicted in Fig. 16. The traces reveal that an increase
in stimulation rate conspicuously reduces ICa,L. We
inspected the time course of gating variables for ICa,L,
IKr, and IKs to quantify their role in rate-dependent AP
changes. We ﬁrst consider a comparison of the slow
2 at the onset of the AP
gating variables f, fCa, xr, and xs
for stimulation periods of 1,000 and 300 ms. These slow
variables are most susceptible to alteration at fast
rates. For IKr and IKs, we found that incomplete deacti-
vation at 300 ms resulted in an increase of 0.05 for xr
2 compared with their values at 1,000
and 0.004 for xs
ms. This compares with reductions of 0.2 for f and 0.16
for fCa. The maximal conductances of ICa,L and IKs are
comparable, whereas the maximal conductance of IKr is
four times smaller. Hence, the changes in the f and fCa
gate result in larger changes in current at the faster
rate, pointing to ICa,L as an important determinant of
AP rate dependence. However, the absolute magnitude
of current changes with rate must be considered rela-
tive to the amplitude of other currents activating at a

H312

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

observation is that the effect of the rate-dependent
decrease in available ICa,L alone is to lower the plateau
potential and to signiﬁcantly accelerate early repolar-
ization. The lower plateau level reduces IK activation,
slows terminal repolarization, and results in no net
change in total APD. Second, we observe that the effect
of the rate-dependent increase in available IK alone is
to lower the plateau potential and to compensate for the
effect of the reduced plateau level on IK activation,
leaving the rate of terminal repolarization unchanged.
The effect of IK rate adaptation alone explains less than
one-half of the total rate-dependent reduction in APD90.
Third, the effect of ICa,L and IK combined is synergistic,
lowering the plateau potential and accelerating late
repolarization relative to the effect of ICa,L alone.
Changes in these two currents together are sufficient to
account for the total rate-dependent AP shortening
observed on reducing the pacing period from 1,000 to
300 ms. Hence, we conclude that ICa,L and IK act
together to produce the observed rate-dependent AP
shortening.
ICa,L and Rate Dependence

Li and Nattel (35) showed that rate dependence can
be abolished in isolated human atrial myocytes by
blocking ICa,L. To compare these experimental data with
the behavior of the model, we evaluated the effects of a
strong decrease in L-type Ca2⫹ channel conductance on
model AP rate dependence. Figure 18A shows model
APs after 12 s of pacing with stimulation at 5,000 and
300 ms with a 90% reduction in ICa,L conductance.
Figure 18B shows corresponding experimental results
from Li and Nattel in which nifedipine was used to
block ICa,L. In the model and experiments, block of ICa,L
abolishes AP rate dependence. Although we have shown
that ICa,L and IK play a role in rate adaptation, it
appears that when ICa,L is strongly inhibited, as in Fig.
18, the plateau level is lowered to the point where IK
activation is greatly reduced and can no longer contrib-
ute to rate adaptation.
Block of INaCa and Role in APD

Recently, Benardeau et al. (4) investigated the role of
Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchange in AP morphology and APD. In
particular, they examined the effect of INaCa block by Li⫹
on AP morphology. Their results revealed a shortening

Fig. 18. Role of ICa,L in rate dependence of action potential. A: model
action potentials recorded after 12 s of pacing at various BCLs with
90% decrease in ICa,L conductance. No rate dependence is observed.
B: experimentally recorded action potentials during stimulation at
BCL ⫽ 5 and 0.3 s in presence of 10 µM nifedipine to block ICa,L. No
rate dependence is observed.

Fig. 19. Model action potentials during stimulation at 1 Hz under
control conditions and with a 90% decrease in INaCa maximal ampli-
tude. Block of INaCa is meant to mimic experimental conditions where
Li⫹ is used to block exchanger. Action potential shortening and slight
hyperpolarization are observed, as in experimental recordings (see
Fig. 7A in Ref. 4).

of APD and transient hyperpolarization after the AP in
the presence of Li⫹. Figure 19 shows control and
INaCa-blocked (90% decrease in maximum exchanger
activity compared with control) model APs with stimu-
lation at 1 s. Model APs display both of the changes
observed in experimental preparations (see Fig. 7A in
Ref. 4), i.e., AP shortening and hyperpolarization. In-
spection of the current records shows that the decrease
in APD may be related to two mechanisms: 1) an
increase in Ca2⫹-dependent ICa,L inactivation caused by
an increase in resting [Ca2⫹]i and Ca2⫹ transient ampli-
tude and 2) a reduction in depolarizing exchanger
current during the late phase of the AP. The observed
membrane hyperpolarization is due to a reduced in-
ward exchanger current at rest, causing a negative
shift of the resting membrane potential.
Variability in AP Morphology

Using the model, we attempted to simulate changes
in current density that could explain the changes in
human atrial AP morphology seen experimentally by
many investigators (1, 4, 17, 24, 50, 51, 54). It has been
suggested that variations in the relative density of the
transient outward current may contribute to some of
the AP variability (17, 54). We concentrated on three
currents: Ito, IKur, and ICa,L. Figure 20 shows the result
of varying the density of each of these three currents,
from one-tenth to three times the control conductance
value, on AP morphology. Figure 20, A–D, shows a
continuum of AP morphologies after 12 s of pacing at a
stimulation period of 1,000 ms for various modiﬁca-
tions of the current densities. For ICa,L, we observe an
increase in APD90 as ICa,L conductance increases. There
is little change in APD90 as IKur conductance decreases.

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

H313

these data for steady-state activation and especially
inactivation of the current are shifted to negative
potentials compared with other human (7, 46) and
animal (57) data. According to the steady-state inactiva-
tion curves in these studies, ⬃90% of the available INa
would be inactivated at resting potentials positive to
⫺80 mV. In conjunction with the small maximum
conductances measured in these human cells (40 pA/pF
maximum current in Ref. 19 compared with 200 pA/pF
in Ref. 57 for rabbit atrial cells), there would be
insufficient current available to generate the large V˙ max
(167 V/s in Ref. 56) and nanoampere-range current
amplitudes typical of the AP upstroke. In their model,
Lindblad et al. (36) use the temperature correction
suggested by Colatsky (10) (⫹3 mV/10°C) to shift the
model curves to more positive potential. In the case of
the human data reported by Feng et al. (19) and
Sakakibara et al. (42), the resulting shift of ⬃5–10 mV
still leaves an inactivation half-maximal potential (V‰)
well negative of the value observed in other mamma-
lian cells and insufficient to generate the required fast
inward current during the AP.

Recent human atrial data from Schneider et al. (46)
display more realistic values for the V‰ of steady-state
inactivation. The I-V curve of Schneider et al. resembles
that measured by Sakakibara et al. (42), and both show
a proﬁle similar to the model I-V curve of Fig. 3,
although the data of Sakakibara et al. display a less
abrupt activation of the current. The time constants of
activation measured by Schneider et al. agree with
those of the model; however, rapid inactivation time
constants are on the order of 1 ms for a wide range of
potentials (between ⫺60 and ⫹90 mV). The model
displays fast inactivation time constants in this range
for potentials positive to ⫺40 mV, but at more negative
potentials (between ⫺80 and ⫺40 mV), fast inactiva-
tion time constants increase in the model (to a maxi-
mum of 25 ms at about ⫺65 mV). The rapid kinetics of
fast inactivation over a wide voltage range reported by
Schneider et al. may be due in part to their use of a
ﬁtting procedure allowing for overlap of activation and
inactivation processes. It is unclear whether fast inacti-
vation slows down in the study of Schneider et al. at
potentials negative to ⫺60 mV. They do not provide any
fast time constants for recovery from inactivation at
potentials between ⫺95 and ⫺60 mV, making it difficult
to determine the value of ␶h at these potentials. On the
basis of their recovery from inactivation data, there
appear to be three time constants involved, whereas
the data of Sakakibara et al. suggest two time con-
stants. Given the difficulties in interpreting the data in
these studies within the context of the simple formula-
tion of Eq. 3, we chose to formulate the kinetics of INa
exactly as in the work of Luo and Rudy (37), which
nevertheless matches experimental data quite well, as
shown in Fig. 2.

Transient outward current. Ito has been shown to
differ substantially in its faster recovery kinetics in
humans than in other mammalian species (20, 47). On
the basis of voltage-clamp current measurements, we
found that Ito activation was best ﬁt using a cubed

Fig. 20. Effect of varying ICa,L (A), IKur (B), and Ito (C), conductances
(10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300% of control) on model action
potential morphology during stimulation at 1 Hz. D: experimental
action potential types described by Wang et al. (54).

For Ito, we observe an increase in APD90 as Ito conduc-
tance decreases for large conductances, then a decrease
in APD90 as Ito conductance decreases for small conduc-
tances. Of the three currents we have investigated, it
appears that only the Ito variations can explain the
whole spectrum of AP morphologies observed experi-
mentally (4, 33, 54). This ranges from rectangular APs
with a short plateau at the lowest Ito conductance
values to shorter triangular APs at high Ito conductance
values, through long spike-and-dome morphologies at
intermediate Ito conductance values. Both IKur and ICa,L
alone can explain a change from a spike-and-dome to a
triangular AP shape, but a reduction in Ito is required in
the model to produce the high plateau and absence of
notch characteristic of a rectangular AP (54). In addi-
tion, the relation between Ito and AP morphology in the
model parallels the relative changes in Ito observed ex-
perimentally in the AP classiﬁcation of Wang et al. (54).

DISCUSSION

We have developed a mathematical model of the
human atrial AP. Whenever possible, we used data
directly measured on human atrial cells to derive model
parameters. When human data were not available to
completely characterize a given current, we relied on
existing AP models based mainly on guinea pig ventricu-
lar (37) and rabbit atrial (36) data. The model yields AP
morphologies that are consistent with a variety of
experimental observations and gives potential insights
into their underlying ionic mechanisms.
Model Current Formulations Compared
with Experimental Data

Fast Na⫹ current. INa is a large, rapid inward current
that has proved difficult to measure accurately using
voltage-clamp techniques. Data from isolated human
atrial cells are available elsewhere (19, 42). However,

H314

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

activation gate. Activation and inactivation were ﬁt to
data from Wang et al. (55). A single inactivation gate
was included in the model. In some current traces, slow
inactivation can be seen, but this was attributed to slow
inactivation of IKur and was not included directly in our
formulation of Ito. The simulated current recordings
shown in Fig. 6 indicate that the model reproduces the
essential properties of experimental recordings of Ito ⫹
IKur (55).

Ultrarapid delayed rectiﬁer current or sustained out-
ward current. IKur has been shown to play an important
role in AP current balance at plateau potentials in
human atrial myocytes (1, 47, 55). On the basis of data
from Wang et al. (55), we found that IKur had activation
kinetics similar to those of Ito but activated at more
negative potentials and displayed only partial slow
inactivation. Those features are included in our formu-
lation of the model. As with Ito, changes in IKur density
can have considerable effects on AP morphology, as
shown in Fig. 20.

L-type Ca2⫹ current. ICa,L has been studied exten-
sively in human atrial tissue (9, 32, 35, 39, 49). Its
complex inactivation kinetics, mediated in part by
intracellular Ca2⫹, are only partially understood (49).
This has made modeling the current more difficult and
highly dependent on an accurate formulation of intracel-
lular Ca2⫹ homeostasis and its control by the SR system
(see SR Ca2⫹ handling and buffering). Our formulation
follows that of Luo and Rudy (37) and includes voltage-
dependent activation and inactivation gates as well as
a Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation gate. We have made
modiﬁcations to the original formulation of Luo and
Rudy on the basis of available experimental data (35,
49). However, as discussed by Luo and Rudy, fundamen-
tal questions regarding the complex voltage- and Ca2⫹-
driven inactivation of ICa,L remain, from an experimen-
tal and a modeling standpoint. For example, data from
Sun et al. (49) suggest that strictly voltage-dependent
inactivation of ICa,L is incomplete even for very long
inactivation pulses. This suggests that steady-state
inactivation ( f⬁) saturates at an inactivation fraction
greater than zero (0.45 measured in Ref. 49). As
reported by Luo and Rudy, we found that implementing
such a relationship gave rise to uncharacteristic re-
sults, such as large ICa,L window currents observed on
reuptake of Ca2⫹ during long APs. Another example can
be found in the data of Sun et al., where an apparent
second Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation time constant, on
the order of 300–400 ms, could be observed during
inactivation of ICa,L. This is not accounted for in the
model, and its origin has not been clariﬁed experimen-
tally. It may be that additional dynamical complexity in
ICa,L inactivation arises as a result of a more complex
time course of the Ca2⫹ transient. This is in agreement
with data from Hatem et al. (26) that point to rapid and
slow phases during the rise of the Ca2⫹ transient in
human atrial myocytes. These factors are related to
limitations in our modeling of the SR Ca2⫹ handling,
which represents a simpliﬁed formulation of a tempo-
rally and spatially complex intracellular process (see
SR Ca2⫹ handling and buffering and Limitations).

Delayed rectiﬁer current. IK has been characterized
by Wang et al. (54) in human atrial cells. As in other
mammalian species (44, 45), IK in human myocytes is
the sum of a rapid and a slow component. We adopted
the current formulation of Zeng et al. (61) ﬁt to human
atrial data (54). Steady-state activation and inactiva-
tion curves from human atrial cells are similar to those
in other species (e.g., rabbit atria in Ref. 45). As pointed
out by Zeng et al., there is conﬂicting evidence regard-
ing the activation and deactivation kinetics of both
currents. Wang et al. concluded that activation was
well ﬁt with a single time constant for both currents;
however, they measured extremely slow activation
time constants for IKs. When included in the model,
these slow kinetics limit the role of IKs during the APO.
Recent evidence from experiments on rabbit and guinea
pig ventricular myocytes suggests fast and slow time
constants for activation and deactivation of IKr and IKs
(27, 43). Fast time constants for activation of IKs
reached a maximum of 330 ms at ⫹10 mV and 37°C. We
account for possible faster kinetics of IKs in the model by
using time constants that are one-half the values
measured by Wang et al., putting the maximum time
constant for IKs activation at ⬃500 ms at ⫹10 mV. By
use of this formulation, IKs plays a more signiﬁcant role
in repolarization during the AP but remains much less
important than IKr at the lower plateau potentials
typical of the human atrial AP.

SR Ca2⫹ handling and buffering. SR Ca2⫹ handling
and buffering involve uptake, storage, and release of
Ca2⫹ from various cellular compartments (58). We
followed the formulation of Luo and Rudy (37) but
included a modiﬁcation to the release mechanism sug-
gested by Friedman et al. (21, 22). Release of Ca2⫹ from
the JSR compartment depends on the ﬂux of Ca2⫹
through the sarcolemmal and SR release channels.
This formulation aims to reﬂect the close coupling of
L-type Ca2⫹ channels in the sarcolemma and JSR Ca2⫹
release channel (34). For closely juxtaposed channels,
one can expect that true local Ca2⫹ concentration in the
vicinity of the release channel
is more accurately
reﬂected by local Ca2⫹ ﬂux than by bulk cellular Ca2⫹
concentration. The formulation is also adapted to afford
a greater sensitivity of the release mechanism to ﬂux
through the L-type Ca2⫹ channel, as opposed to Ca2⫹
entry through the Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger (22). Release is
triggered when the computed Ca2⫹ ﬂux exceeds a
predeﬁned threshold through the opening of an activa-
tion gate u. Inactivation is mediated through one
ﬂux-dependent (v) and one voltage-dependent (w) inac-
tivation gate. An added advantage of this formulation is
that it is completely analytic and does not require
identiﬁcation of qualitative trigger events such as the
occurrence of V˙ max.

As shown in Fig. 13, Ca2⫹ transients elicited in the
model are qualitatively similar in amplitude and late
time course to the experimental transients recorded in
response to voltage-clamp steps to 0 mV (26). The
discrepancy in the initial rise of the transient has
potentially complex causes. The experimental tran-
sients were recorded at room temperature, which may

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

H315

IK, IK1, and INaCa. This may explain some of the variabil-
ity in APD90 measurements from human atrial cells
and tissues (5, 23, 24, 32, 33).

in part explain their slower rise. In addition, their
rising phase included rapid and slow components. It
was postulated by Hatem et al. (26) that the slow rising
phase was due to Ca2⫹ release from sites not closely
juxtaposed to sarcolemmal L-type Ca2⫹ channels. Be-
cause of the absence of intracellular Ca2⫹ diffusion or
speciﬁc myoplasmic Ca2⫹ compartments in our model,
it is unrealistic to expect to be able to directly reproduce
these features of the transient. We may consider the
modeled transient as a compromise formulation that
reproduces the rapid rise in local Ca2⫹ concentration
expected in the vicinity of the sarcolemma. This en-
sures our ability to use [Ca2⫹]i as a direct inactivator of
ICa,L through the fCa gate. An updated formulation of
intracellular Ca2⫹ handling should include local myo-
plasmic compartments in an attempt to capture the
essential features of intracellular Ca2⫹ diffusion.

Inward rectiﬁer K⫹ current. IK1 plays a major role in
the late repolarization phase of the AP and in determin-
ing resting membrane potential and resistance. As
stated earlier, there is considerable variability in the
measured input resistance of isolated human atrial
cells (1, 52), with resting potentials often displaced to
positive potentials compared with multicellular tissue
preparations (1, 52, 54, 56). Our formulation of IK1 was
adjusted to reproduce the slow late repolarization rate
observed in human atrial AP recordings. In doing so, we
were able to produce a realistic resting membrane
resistance of 180 M⍀ (52) and a resting potential
characteristic of healthy human atrial multicellular
preparations of around ⫺80 mV (56). The model I-V
relationship for IK1 (Fig. 4) has a shape characteristic of
direct recordings in human atrial cells (31), but the
speciﬁc parameters were adjusted to match the AP
characteristics described above.

Behavior of the Model AP

Control model AP. The control model AP exhibits a
spike-and-dome morphology. As discussed below, sev-
eral AP morphologies have been recorded from human
atrial cells. In the model the transient outward current
produces the initial phase 1 repolarization after the
INa-driven upstroke. On inactivation of Ito, ICa,L, which
remains after rapid Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation, causes
a slight depolarization of the membrane and produces
the dome of the AP. This net inward current is eventu-
ally countered by the slowly activating outward IK,
resulting in slow repolarization. Slow late repolariza-
tion is a balance between deactivating IK, time-
independent IK1, and opposing inward current gener-
ated by the Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger during the late phase
of the AP.

Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger. The Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger plays
an important role in determining APD. As in experi-
ments, we have shown that the exchanger is partly
responsible for producing the slow late repolarization
typical of human atrial APs. Block of the exchanger
resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in APD90 (30% in Fig.
19). Because of the slow repolarization rate and small
current amplitudes during late repolarization, APD90 is
sensitive to small changes in late AP currents such as

Rate dependence of model AP. Rate dependence of the
model AP is described in Fig. 16 and 17 and Table 3.
The model is consistent with experimental data in
several respects. First, it exhibits little rate depen-
dence at frequencies ⬍1 Hz, consistent with data from
Fermini et al. (20) and Le Grand et al. (32). The model
predicts greater relative AP shortening at APD50 than
at APD90. This is seen in the data of Le Grand et al.,
even though their APD90 values are somewhat greater
than those of the model. Comparing the top panels of
Fig. 16, we observe that in experimental recordings and
model simulations the AP waveforms at various rates
tend to converge at some positive potential before
complete recovery. Late repolarization is slowed at
faster rates, in part because of a reduced activation of
IK in APs with shorter, more negative plateaus that
opposes the rate-dependent increase in IK availability.
This tends to reduce rate adaptation of the model AP
measured using APD90 and is a direct consequence of
the sensitivity of late AP repolarization to small changes
in IK, IK1, and INaCa, as discussed above.

Variability in AP morphology. Variability in AP mor-
phology is often observed in recordings of human atrial
APs. Early observations of APs from isolated human
atrial tissue demonstrated a considerable variability in
their morphology (17, 24, 50, 51). Some cells showed
little phase 1 repolarization and a positive plateau;
others exhibited a prominent phase 1 with a ‘‘spike-and-
dome’’ morphology (17, 24, 50). It was suggested that
age-related differences may be due to changes in Ito
(17). Recently, there have been attempts to deﬁne
various types of APs on the basis of their morphological
characteristics and/or underlying ionic current densi-
ties (1, 4, 54). Wang et al. (54) identiﬁed three ‘‘types’’ of
APs on the basis of morphology, ranging from type 1, a
rectangular AP with a positive plateau, through type 2,
a spike-and-dome AP with a plateau at ⬃0 mV, to type
3, a triangular AP with little plateau. They associated
these changes in morphology with a measured increase
in the relative density of Ito to IK from type 1 to type 3
APs. Benardeau et al. (4) recently characterized two AP
types in their isolated human atrial cell preparations:
type AAPs are spike-and-dome APs with a high plateau
similar to Wang’s type 1 or 2 APs; type B APs were
triangular APs similar to Wang’s type 3. In an attempt
to identify the source of differences in AP morphology
between types A and B, these investigators found no
discernible difference in ICa,L density between the two
cell types. All three AP types have been recorded from
human atrial multicellular preparations with ﬁne-
tipped microelectrodes (38).

The control model AP is typical of the type 1 APs
described previously (38, 54). Our investigation of the
role of Ito, IKur, and ICa,L in AP morphology in Fig. 20
reveals that, in our model, variations in Ito alone are
able to generate many of the variations in AP morphol-
ogy observed experimentally. AP shapes range from a
triangular morphology (type 3 in Refs. 38 and 54 and

H316

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

type A in Ref. 4) for large Ito, through a spike-and-dome
morphology (type 1 in Refs. 38 and 54) at intermediate
Ito conductances, to a rectangular morphology (type 2 in
Refs. 38 and 54 and type B in Ref. 4) for small Ito
amplitudes. In contrast, variations in IKur and ICa,L
alone cannot reproduce the rectangular morphology
observed only in the presence of a small Ito. The role of
Ito as an important determinant of AP morphology is
supported by current measurements (54) showing that
changes in AP morphology types (1, 2, and 3) were
accompanied by changes in the relative amplitude of Ito
consistent with the results of Fig. 20. An increase in Ito
density was also shown to accompany the change from
rectangular to spike-and-dome AP morphology ob-
served in young vs. adult human atrial myocytes (17).
Although the amplitude of Ito appears to be an impor-
tant determinant of AP morphology, it is clear that it
cannot be considered independently of other membrane
currents and that AP morphology will depend on the
relative amplitudes of all currents involved.

Clinical Relevance

Atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) is the most common sustained
arrhythmia in clinical practice and that for which
treatment remains the most problematic (38). The AP
model provides insights into the basic mechanisms
underlying a variety of important clinical determinants
of AF. Impaired atrial APD accommodation to rate has
been observed in patients with AF (5) and likely
underlies the ﬂat refractory period-heart rate relation-
ship of patients susceptible to AF (2). Our model points
to rate-dependent ICa,L inactivation combined with in-
complete IK deactivation as the basic mechanism of
APD accommodation to rate. Work by Li and Nattel (35)
suggests that inhibition of ICa,L alone is sufficient to
abolish rate adaptation of the human atrial AP, and it
has been shown that human myocytes from dilated
atria have a substantially reduced ICa,L (32, 39). In the
present study, strong ICa,L reduction alone was suffi-
cient to abolish rate adaptation of the model AP (Fig.
18). Although IK and ICa,L contribute to model AP rate
adaptation, important reductions in ICa,L lower plateau
height to the point where IK is greatly reduced and AP
accommodation is virtually abolished. The model ex-
plains how strong reductions in ICa,L, as caused by
atrial disease in humans or by exposure experimentally
to ICa,L blockers, can largely abolish AP rate adaptation
and contribute to the susceptibility to AF.

Another property strongly associated with the occur-
rence of AF is AP heterogeneity (38). The present model
indicates that variations in plateau currents (particu-
larly Ito) over the experimentally measured range can
account for much of the AP variability reported in
human atria. These mechanistic insights hold the
promise of an understanding of how drugs that alter
ionic currents can affect these important AP properties
and, thus, may help in the development of improved
therapeutic approaches to treating atrial reentrant
arrhythmias like AF.

Potential Limitations

Although we have tried to develop a model that is
closely based on experimental data, limitations exist
because of availability of data and considerable variabil-
ity in existing experimental data. Limitations of this
work are similar to those discussed for recent ionic
models (36). The following issues should be considered
in evaluating the model.

Data from human atrial cells and tissues typically
display considerable variability, with a wide range of
current densities having direct consequences on AP
shape, rate dependence, and response to pharmacologi-
cal intervention. The use of averaged data from se-
lected preparations does not take this into consideration
and introduces possible complications in comparing
model output with experimental AP recordings under
various experimental conditions. This is in part why we
have considered carefully the effect of varying speciﬁc
current conductances on AP morphology. In addition,
the temperature dependence of current kinetics and
amplitude is often poorly characterized and must be
approximated, with the help of available data, during
the course of model development.

When possible, we have attempted to show experi-
mental data along with corresponding simulated behav-
ior. However, we note that, for voltage-clamp current
recordings and experimental I-V curves, there may be
signiﬁcant bias in the measured current amplitudes.
Selection factors such as the ability to record measur-
able currents and the viability of cells contribute to
bias, especially with currents that are difficult to
measure or display signiﬁcant variability, such as ICa,L
or IK. These amplitude-dependent selection factors are
unlikely to bias the measured kinetics of a given
current. Because of bias in current amplitude measure-
ments, it is rare that exact current densities reported in
experimental studies can be incorporated directly into
a model and produce a realistic AP morphology. When
necessary, current densities from experimental data
were adjusted in the model to improve overall AP
properties. The same limitations apply to direct com-
parisons of current recordings to corresponding model
output. Such comparisons can be misleading unless one
selects a current trace with an amplitude that exactly
matches the amplitude used in the model or unless a
scaling factor is used to match the peak current ampli-
tudes. This is why we chose to present scaled experimen-
tal data for current recordings and I-V curves, with the
scaling factor selected to match the maximum current
amplitudes in the experiments to those in the model.
Whenever such scaling is carried out, we ensured that
the corresponding scaling factor was explicitly given to
allow comparison of current magnitudes between model
and experimental data.

Limited data are available on intracellular Ca2⫹
dynamics, Ca2⫹ storage and release kinetics from the
SR, and its role in the inactivation of ICa,L. We have
used a modiﬁed version of the intracellular Ca2⫹-
handling scheme proposed by Luo and Rudy (37). This
produces a realistic intracellular Ca2⫹ transient in
response to suprathreshold Ca2⫹ ﬂux into the cell.

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

H317

However, recent experimental results suggest that
Ca2⫹-dependent ICa,L inactivation may involve complex
local phenomena requiring an additional level of model
complexity (49), beyond an accurate representation of
the average Ca2⫹ transient. This is also important in
view of the sensitive dependence of the model AP and
its rate dependence on the dynamics of late repolariza-
tion, controlled in part by the Ca2⫹-dependent INaCa.

Our formulation of the delayed rectiﬁer current
represents a compromise between a simple current
representation and available experimental evidence
that IKr and IKs may display complex, multiexponential
deactivation kinetics (27, 43). Slow deactivation of
these currents may have important effects on late
repolarization, refractoriness, and AP rate dependence.
Whenever possible, we have tried to select the simplest
formulation that captures the essential features of
available experimental data. It is possible that the
complex kinetics of some currents, such as IK, require
more detailed current formulations involving several
channel states not readily modeled using a simple
Hodgkin-Huxley formalism.

We have chosen not to consider time-varying extracel-
lular ion concentrations in our model at this stage.
Certain currents, such as IK1, are known to depend on
extracellular ion concentrations. Accumulation of ions
in the extracellular cleft space may be an important
modulator of ionic currents and AP characteristics at
fast pacing rates. These phenomena may be taken into
account by modifying appropriate current formulations
and including dynamic extracellular cleft space ion
concentrations in the model.

Finally, our model was adjusted to produce stable
ionic concentrations at rest. In response to periodic
stimulation, ionic balance is disturbed and slow changes
in intracellular ionic concentrations occur in the model.
Initial transients due to kinetic rate adaptation of the
currents dissipate over a few seconds. However, small
changes in ionic concentrations can take several min-
utes to develop and result in slow changes in the
morphology of the AP. These changes are dependent on
the nature and the formulation of the stimulus. The
long-term behavior of the model depends on whether
the charge applied through the stimulus is carried by
an ion, the balance of which is explicitly included in the
model. The choice of the ion selected to carry the
stimulus charge also affects the outcome. We have
chosen to simulate the model without the stimulus
having a direct effect on the ion concentrations. The
sensitivity of long-term ionic concentrations to stimu-
lus formulation and frequency is a property of ionic
models that attempt to preserve a detailed ionic bal-
ance (25a, 50a). When discussing results under periodic
pacing, we have chosen to present model results after
initial rapid transients have dissipated, after 12 s of
pacing from rest. The AP morphology at this point is
independent of the form and implementation of the
stimulus and takes into account the kinetic adaptation
of the currents at the speciﬁed pacing frequency. How-
ever, it does not include the effect of concentration
changes occurring on a slower time scale in the model.
This is also true of the experimental data on which the

model is based. Most frequency-dependent data are
collected with the assumption that preparations stabi-
lize within seconds of the onset of stimulation. A
detailed investigation of the long-term dynamics of the
model and its dependence on the formulation of the
stimulus is left for further study.

APPENDIX: MODEL FORMULATION

Some fractional equations require evaluation of a limit to
determine their values at membrane potentials for which
their denominator is zero.

Differential Equations

Instantaneous equilibration of Ca2⫹ with buffers is as-

sumed in all cases

dV
dt

⫽

⫺(Iion ⫹ Ist)

Cm

Iion ⫽ INa ⫹ IK1 ⫹ Ito ⫹ IKur ⫹ IKr ⫹ IKs ⫹ ICa,L

⫹ Ip,Ca ⫹ INaK ⫹ INaCa ⫹ Ib,Na ⫹ Ib,Ca

(18)

(19)

(where y is any gating variable)

(20)

dy
dt

y⬁ ⫺ y

⫽

␶y
d[Na⫹]i

⫽

⫺3INaK ⫺ 3INaCa ⫺ Ib,Na ⫺ INa

FVi

dt

2INaK ⫺ IK1 ⫺ Ito ⫺ IKur ⫺ IKr ⫺ IKs ⫺ Ib,K

d[K⫹]i

dt

⫽

FVi
d[Ca2⫹]i

⫽

B1
B2

dt

B1 ⫽

2INaCa ⫺ Ip,Ca ⫺ ICa,L ⫺ Ib,Ca

2FVi

⫹

Vup(Iup,leak ⫺ Iup) ⫹ IrelVrel

Vi

B2 ⫽ 1 ⫹

[Trpn]maxKm,Trpn
([Ca2⫹]i ⫹ Km,Trpn)2

⫹

[Cmdn]maxKm,Cmdn
([Ca2⫹]i ⫹ Km,Cmdn)2

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(29)

(30)

d[Ca2⫹]up

dt

⫽ Iup ⫺ Iup,leak ⫺ Itr

Vrel
Vup
[Csqn]maxKm,Csqn

([Ca2⫹]rel ⫹ Km,Csqn)26⫺1

d[Ca2⫹]rel

dt

⫽ (Itr ⫺ Irel)51 ⫹

Equilibrium Potential

Ex ⫽

RT
zF

log

[X]o
[X]i

Fast Na⫹ Current

,

for X ⫽ Na⫹, K⫹, Ca2⫹

(28)

INa ⫽ gNam3hj(V ⫺ ENa)

V ⫹ 47.13

1 ⫺ exp [⫺0.1(V ⫹ 47.13)]

␣m ⫽50.32

3.2, if V ⫽ ⫺47.13

␤m ⫽ 0.08 exp 1⫺

V

112

H318

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

␣h ⫽50.135 exp 1⫺

0, if V ⱖ ⫺40

V ⫹ 80

6.8 2

(31)

␤h ⫽53.56 exp (0.079V) ⫹ 3.1 ⫻ 105 exp (0.35V)

50.1331 ⫹ exp 1⫺

V ⫹ 10.66

246⫺1

11.1

,

if V ⱖ ⫺40

0.05

␣u(a) ⫽ 0.65 3exp 1⫺

gKur ⫽ 0.005 ⫹

V ⫹ 10

1 ⫹ exp 1⫺
8.5 2 ⫹ exp 1⫺
␤u(a) ⫽ 0.65 32.5 ⫹ exp 1V ⫹ 82
17.0 24⫺1

V ⫺ 15

13 2
59.0 24⫺1

V ⫺ 30

␣j ⫽53⫺127,140 exp (0.2444V) ⫺ 3.474 ⫻ 10⫺5 exp (⫺0.04391V)4

if V ⱖ ⫺40

0,

V ⫹ 37.78

1 ⫹ exp [0.311(V ⫹ 79.23)]

exp (⫺0.01052V)

1 ⫹ exp [⫺0.1378(V ⫹ 40.14)]

␤j ⫽50.1212

0.3

exp [⫺2.535 ⫻ 10⫺7V]
1 ⫹ exp [⫺0.1(V ⫹ 32)]

(33)

,

if V ⱖ ⫺40

␶␾ ⫽ (␣␾ ⫹ ␤␾)⫺1,

␾⬁ ⫽ ␣␾␶␾,

for ␾ ⫽ m, h, j

(34)

Time-Independent K⫹ Current

IK1 ⫽

gK1(V ⫺ EK)

1 ⫹ exp [0.07(V ⫹ 80)]

Transient Outward K⫹ Current

Ito ⫽ gto oa

3oi(V ⫺ EK)

V ⫺ 30

59.0 24⫺1

␣o(a) ⫽ 0.65 3exp 1⫺

V ⫹ 10

8.5 2 ⫹ exp 1⫺
␤o(a) ⫽ 0.65 32.5 ⫹ exp 1V ⫹ 82
17.0 24⫺1
␶o(a) ⫽ [␣o(a) ⫹ ␤o(a)]⫺1/KQ10

V ⫹ 20.47

17.54 24⫺1
oa(⬁) ⫽ 31 ⫹ exp 1⫺
␣o(i) ⫽ 318.53 ⫹ exp 1V ⫹ 113.7
10.95 24⫺1
7.44 24⫺1

␤o(i) ⫽ 335.56 ⫹ exp 1⫺

V ⫹ 1.26

␶o(i) ⫽ [␣o(i) ⫹ ␤o(i)]⫺1/KQ10
oi(⬁) ⫽ 31 ⫹ exp 1V ⫹ 43.1
24⫺1

5.3

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

␶u(a) ⫽ [␣u(a) ⫹ ␤u(a)]⫺1/KQ10
V ⫹ 30.3
24⫺1
ua(⬁) ⫽ 31 ⫹ exp 1⫺
24⫺1
␣u(i) ⫽ 321 ⫹ exp 1⫺

V ⫺ 185

9.6

28

16

␤u(i) ⫽ exp 1V ⫺ 158
2
␶u(i) ⫽ [␣u(i) ⫹ ␤u(i)]⫺1/KQ10
ui(⬁) ⫽ 31 ⫹ exp 1V ⫺ 99.45
27.48 24⫺1

Rapid Delayed Outward Rectiﬁer K⫹ Current

IKr ⫽

gKrxr(V ⫺ EK)
1 ⫹ exp 1V ⫹ 15
22.4 2

␣x(r) ⫽ 0.0003

V ⫹ 14.1

1 ⫺ exp 1⫺

V ⫹ 14.1

2

5

␤x(r) ⫽ 7.3898 ⫻ 10⫺5

V ⫺ 3.3328

exp 1V ⫺ 3.3328

5.1237 2 ⫺ 1

␶x(r) ⫽ [␣x(r) ⫹ ␤x(r)]⫺1

xr(⬁) ⫽ 31 ⫹ exp 1⫺

V ⫹ 14.1

6.5

24⫺1

Slow Delayed Outward Rectiﬁer K⫹ Current

␣x(s) ⫽ 4 ⫻ 10⫺5

IKs ⫽ gKsx s

2(V ⫺ EK)
V ⫺ 19.9

1 ⫺ exp 1⫺

V ⫺ 19.9

17

2

Ultrarapid Delayed Rectiﬁer K⫹ Current

␤x(s) ⫽ 3.5 ⫻ 10⫺5

IKur ⫽ gKuru a

3ui(V ⫺ EK)

(41)

V ⫺ 19.9

exp 1V ⫺ 19.9

9

2 ⫺ 1

(42)

(43)

(32)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

␶x(s) ⫽

1
2

[␣x(s) ⫹ ␤x(s)]⫺1

xs(⬁) ⫽ 31 ⫹ exp 1⫺

V ⫺ 19.9

12.7 24⫺1/2

L-Type Ca2⫹ Current

␶d ⫽

V ⫹ 10

ICa,L ⫽ gCa,Ld f fCa(V ⫺ 65)
1 ⫺ exp 1⫺

6.24 2
6.24 24
0.035(V ⫹ 10)31 ⫹ exp 1⫺
24⫺1

d⬁ ⫽ 31 ⫹ exp 1⫺

V ⫹ 10

V ⫹ 10

8

(52)

(53)

(54)

␶v ⫽ 1.91 ⫹ 2.0911 ⫹ exp3⫺
v⬁ ⫽ 1 ⫺11 ⫹ exp3⫺

Fn ⫺ 3.4175 ⫻ 10⫺13

13.67 ⫻ 10⫺16

42⫺1

Fn ⫺ 6.835 ⫻ 10⫺14

13.67 ⫻ 10⫺16

42⫺1

␶w ⫽ 6.0

31 ⫹ 0.3 exp 1⫺
w⬁ ⫽ 1 ⫺ 31 ⫹ exp 1⫺

V⫺ 7.9

1 ⫺ exp 1⫺

5
V ⫺ 7.9

5

2
24(V ⫺ 7.9)
17 24⫺1
11

ICa,L ⫺

1
5

2

V ⫺ 40

Fn ⫽ 10⫺12VrelIrel ⫺

5 ⫻ 10⫺13

F

INaCa2

␶f ⫽ 950.0197 exp [⫺0.03372(V ⫹ 10)2] ⫹ 0.026⫺1

Transfer Current From NSR to JSR

f⬁ ⫽ 31 ⫹ exp 1V ⫹ 28
6.9 24⫺1
fCa(⬁) ⫽ 11 ⫹

␶f (Ca) ⫽ 2,

[Ca2⫹]i

0.000352⫺1

Na⫹-K⫹ Pump Current

INaK ⫽ INaK(max)fNaK

1

[K⫹]o

1 ⫹ 5Km,Na(i)/[Na⫹]i61.5

[K⫹]o ⫹ Km,K(o)

fNaK ⫽31 ⫹ 0.1245 exp1⫺0.1

FV

RT2 ⫹ 0.0365␴ exp1⫺

FV

RT24⫺1

␴ ⫽

1

73exp1[Na⫹]o

67.3 2 ⫺ 14

Na⫹/Ca2⫹ Exchanger Current

(55)

(56)

(57)

(58)

(59)

Itr ⫽

[Ca2⫹]up ⫺ [Ca2⫹]rel

␶tr

␶tr ⫽ 180

Ca2⫹ Uptake Current by the NSR

Iup ⫽

Iup(max)

1 ⫹ (Kup/[Ca2⫹]i)

Ca2⫹ Leak Current by the NSR

Iup,leak ⫽

[Ca2⫹]up

[Ca2⫹]up(max)

Iup(max)

Ca2⫹ Buffers

[Ca2⫹]Cmdn ⫽ [Cmdn]max

[Ca2⫹]i

[Ca2⫹]i ⫹ Km,Cmdn

INaCa(max) 5exp [␥FV/(RT)][Na⫹]i

3[Ca2⫹]o ⫺ exp [(␥ ⫺ 1)FV/(RT)][Na⫹]o

3[Ca2⫹]i 6

(K m,Na

3 ⫹ [Na⫹]o

3)(Km,Ca ⫹ [Ca2⫹]o) · 51 ⫹ ksat exp [(␥ ⫺ 1)FV/(RT)]6

INa,Ca ⫽

Background Currents

Ib,Ca ⫽ gb,Ca(V ⫺ ECa)

Ib,Na ⫽ gb,Na(V ⫺ ENa)

(61)

(62)

Ca2⫹ Pump Current

[Ca2⫹]Trpn ⫽ [Trpn]max

[Ca2⫹]i

[Ca2⫹]i ⫹ Km,Trpn

[Ca2⫹]Csqn ⫽ [Csqn]max

[Ca2⫹]rel

[Ca2⫹]rel ⫹ Km,Csqn

H319

(66)

(67)

(68)

(69)

(70)

(71)

(72)

(73)

(60)

(74)

(75)

Ip,Ca ⫽ Ip,Ca(max)

[Ca2⫹]i

0.0005 ⫹ [Ca2⫹]i

(63)

Numerical Integration

Ca2⫹ Release Current From JSR

Irel ⫽ krelu 2vw([Ca2⫹]rel ⫺ [Ca2⫹]i)

␶u ⫽ 8.0, u⬁ ⫽11 ⫹ exp3⫺

Fn ⫺ 3.4175 ⫻ 10⫺13

13.67 ⫻ 10⫺16

42⫺1

At time step p, the updated value of a time-dependent

variable is given by

␹ (p) ⫽ ␹ ( p ⫺ 1) ⫹ ⌬t

d␹
dt

(76)

for ␹ ⫽ V, any time-dependent ionic concentration, and

(64)

(65)

H320

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

y ( p) ⫽ y⬁ ⫹ [y ( p ⫺ 1) ⫺ y⬁] exp 1⫺

⌬t

␶y2

(77)

for y ⫽ any gating variable.

The authors thank Drs. Jianlin Feng, Normand Leblanc, Gui-
Rong Li, Hui Sun, and Zhiguo Wang for help with experimental data
and Jean Perrault and Charles Dupont for the use of computer
equipment.

This work was funded by grants from the Medical Research
Council of Canada (S. Nattel) and the Natural Sciences and Engineer-
ing Research Council (M. Courtemanche). M. Courtemanche is
supported by a Chercheur-Boursier Scholarship from the Fonds de
Recherche en Sante´ du Que´bec.

Address for reprint requests: M. Courtemanche, Research Center,
Montreal Heart Institute, 5000 E. Belanger St., Montreal, PQ,
Canada H1T 1C8.
Received 29 September 1997; accepted in ﬁnal form 5 February 1998.

REFERENCES
1. Amos, G. J., E. Wettwer, F. Metzger, Q. Li, H. M. Himmel,
and U. Ravens. Differences between outward currents of hu-
man atrial and subepicardial ventricular myocytes. J. Physiol.
(Lond.) 491: 31–50, 1996.

2. Attuel, P., R. Childers, B. Cauchemez, J. Poveda, J. Mugica,
and P. Coumel. Failure in the rate adaptation of the atrial
refractory period: its relationship to vulnerability. Int. J. Cardiol.
2: 179–197, 1982.

3. Backx, P. H., and E. Marban. Background potassium current
active during the plateau of the action potential in guinea pig
ventricle myocytes. Circ. Res. 72: 890–900, 1993.

4. Benardeau, A., S. N. Hatem, C. Rucker-Martin, B. Le
Grand, L. Mace, P. Dervanian, J. J. Mercadier, and E.
Coraboeuf. Contribution of Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchange to action poten-
tial of human atrial myocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 271 (Heart Circ.
Physiol. 40): H1151–H1161, 1996.

5. Boutjdir, M., J. Y. Le Heuzey, T. Lavergne, S. Chauvaud, L.
Guize, A. Carpentier, and P. Peronneau. Inhomogeneity of
cellular refractoriness in human atrium: factor of arrhythmia?
Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol. 9: 1095–1100, 1986.

6. Boyle, W. A., and J. M. Nerbonne. A novel type of depolariza-
tion-activated K⫹ current in isolated adult rat atrial myocytes.
Am. J. Physiol. 260 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 29): H1236–H1247,
1991.

7. Bustamante, J. O., and T. F. McDonald. Sodium currents in

segments of human heart cells. Science 220: 320–321, 1983.

8. Clark, R. B., W. R. Giles, and Y. Imaizumi. Properties of the
transient outward current in rabbit atrial cells. J. Physiol.
(Lond.) 405: 147–168, 1988.

9. Cohen, N. M., and W. J. Lederer. Calcium current in single
human cardiac myocytes. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 4: 422–
437, 1993.

10. Colatsky, T. J. Voltage clamp measurements of sodium channel
properties in rabbit cardiac Purkinje ﬁbres. J. Physiol. (Lond.)
305: 215–234, 1980.

11. Doerr, T., R. Denger, A. Doerr, and W. Trautwein. Ionic
currents contributing to the action potential in single ventricular
myocytes of the guinea pig studied with action potential clamp.
Pﬂu¨ gers Arch. 416: 230–237, 1990.

12. Duan, D., B. Fermini, and S. Nattel. Sustained outward
current observed after Ito1 inactivation in rabbit atrial myocytes
is a novel Cl⫺ current. Am. J. Physiol. 263 (Heart Circ. Physiol.
32): H1967–H1971, 1992.

13. Dukes, I. D., and M. Morad. The transient K⫹ current in rat
ventricular myocytes: evaluation of its Ca2⫹ and Na⫹ depen-
dence. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 435: 395–420, 1990.

14. Earm, Y. E., and D. Noble. A model of the single atrial cell:
relation between calcium current and calcium release. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 240: 83–96, 1990.

15. Ebihara, L., and E. A. Johnson. Fast sodium current in
cardiac muscle: a quantitative description. Biophys. J. 32: 779–
790, 1980.

16. Escande, D., A. Coulombe, J. F. Faivre, E. Deroubaix, and
E. Coraboeuf. Two types of transient outward currents in adult
human atrial cells. Am. J. Physiol. 252 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 21):
H142–H148, 1987.

17. Escande, D., D. Loisance, C. Planche, and E. Coraboeuf.
Age-related changes of action potential shape in isolated human
atrial ﬁbers. Am. J. Physiol. 249 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 18):
H843–H850, 1985.

18. Fedida, D., B. Wible, Z. Wang, B. Fermini, F. Faust, S.
Nattel, and A. M. Brown. Identity of a novel delayed rectiﬁer
from human heart with a cloned K⫹ channel current. Circ. Res.
73: 210–216, 1993.

19. Feng, J., G. R. Li, B. Fermini, and S. Nattel. Properties of
sodium and potassium currents of cultured adult human atrial
myocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 270 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 39): H1676–
H1686, 1996.

20. Fermini, B., Z. Wang, D. Duan, and S. Nattel. Differences in
the rate dependence of the transient outward current in rabbit
and human atrium. Am. J. Physiol. 263 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 32):
H1747–H1754, 1992.

21. Friedman, N. E´ tude d’un nouveau mode`le du myocyte cardiaque
incorporant une re´gulation du calcium intracellulaire (Master’s
thesis). Montreal: E´ cole Polytechnique de Montre´al, Universite´
de Montre´al, 1996.

22. Friedman, N., A. Vinet, and F. A. Roberge. A study of a new
model of the cardiac ventricular cell incorporating myoplasmic
calcium regulation. Proc. XXII Comput. Med. Biomed. Eng. Soc.
Conf. 1996, p. 92–93.

23. Gautier, P., D. Escande, J. P. Bertrand, J. Seguin, and P.
Guiraudou. Electrophysiological effects of penticainide (CM
7857) in isolated human atrial and ventricular ﬁbers. J. Cardio-
vasc. Pharmacol. 13: 328–335, 1989.

24. Gelband, H., H. L. Bush, M. R. Rosen, R. J. Myerburg, and
B. F. Hoffman. Electrophysiologic properties of isolated prepara-
tions of human atrial myocardium. Circ. Res. 30: 293–300, 1972.
25. Giles, W. R., and A. C. G. Van Ginneken. A transient outward
current in isolated cells from the crista terminalis of rabbit heart.
J. Physiol. (Lond.) 368: 243–264, 1985.

25a.Guan, S., Q. Lu, and K. Huang. A discussion about the

DiFrancesco-Noble model. J. Theor. Biol. 189: 27–32, 1997.

26. Hatem, S. N., A. Be´nardeau, C. Rucker-Martin, I. Marty, P.
de Chamisso, M. Villaz, and J. J. Mercadier. Different
compartments of sarcoplasmic reticulum participate in the exci-
tation-contraction coupling process in human atrial myocytes.
Circ. Res. 80: 343–353, 1997.

27. Heath, B. M., and D. A. Terrar. The deactivation kinetics of the
delayed rectiﬁer components IKr and IKs in guinea-pig isolated
ventricular myocytes. Exp. Physiol. 81: 605–621, 1996.

28. Hille, B., A. M. Woodhull, and B. I. Shapiro. Negative surface
charge near the sodium channels of nerve: divalent ions, monova-
lent ions, and pH. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Biol. Sci. 270:
301–318, 1975.

29. Jeck, C. D., and P. A. Boyden. Age-related appearance of
outward currents may contribute to developmental differences in
ventricular repolarization. Circ. Res. 71: 1390–1403, 1992.

30. Koumi, S., C. E. Arentzen, C. L. Backer, and J. A. Wasser-
strom. Alterations in muscarinic K⫹ channel response to ACh
and to G protein-mediated activation in atrial myocytes isolated
from failing human hearts. Circulation 90: 2213–2224, 1994.

31. Koumi, S., C. L. Backer, and C. E. Arentzen. Characteriza-
tion of inwardly rectifying K⫹ channel in human cardiac myo-
cytes. Circulation 92: 164–174, 1995.

32. Le Grand, B., S. Hatem, E. Deroubaix, J. P. Couetil, and E.
Coraboeuf. Depressed transient outward and calcium currents
in dilated human atria. Cardiovasc. Res. 28: 548–556, 1994.

33. Le Grand, B., J. Y. Le Heuzey, P. Perier, P. Peronneau, T.
Lavergne, S. Hatem, and L. Guize. Cellular electrophysiologi-
cal effects of ﬂecainide on human atrial ﬁbres. Cardiovasc. Res.
24: 232–238, 1990.

34. Lewis, C. S., K. Felix, A. H. Caswell, N. R. Brandt, W. J. Ball,
P. L. Vaghy, G. Meissner, and D. G. Ferguson. Immunolocal-
ization of sarcolemmal DHP receptor and SR traidin and ryano-
dine receptor in rabbit ventricle and atrium. J. Cell Biol. 129:
673–682, 1995.

HUMAN ATRIAL ACTION POTENTIAL MODEL

H321

35. Li, G. R., and S. Nattel. Properties of human atrial ICa at
physiological temperatures and relevance to action potential.
Am. J. Physiol. 272 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 41): H227–H235, 1997.
36. Lindblad, D. S., C. R. Murphey, J. W. Clark, and W. R. Giles.
A model of the action potential and underlying membrane
currents in a rabbit atrial cell. Am. J. Physiol. 271 (Heart Circ.
Physiol. 40): H1666–H1696, 1996.

37. Luo, C., and Y. Rudy. A dynamic model of the cardiac ventricu-

lar action potential. Circ. Res. 74: 1071–1096, 1994.

38. Nattel, S., M. Courtemanche, and Z. Wang. Functional and
ionic mechanisms of antiarrhythmic drugs in atrial ﬁbrillation.
In: Atrial Fibrillation: Mechanisms and Management (2nd ed.),
edited by R. H. Falk and P. J. Podrid. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-
Raven, 1977, p. 75–90.

39. Ouadid, H., B. Albat, and J. Nargeot. Calcium currents in
diseased human cardiac cells. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 25:
282–291, 1995.

40. Rasmusson, R. L., J. W. Clark, W. R. Giles, E. F. Shibata, and
D. L. Campbell. A mathematical model of a bullfrog cardiac
pacemaker cell. Am. J. Physiol. 259 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 28):
H352–H369, 1990.

41. Roberts, S. L., K. M. Knoth, S. Po, T. A. Blair, P. B. Bennett,
R. P. Hartshorne, D. J. Snyders, and M. M. Tamkun.
Molecular biology of the voltage-gated potassium channels of the
cardiovascular system. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 4: 68–80,
1993.

42. Sakakibara, Y., J. A. Wasserstrom, T. Furukawa, H. Jia, C.
E. Arentzen, R. S. Hartz, and D. H. Singer. Characterization
of the sodium current in single human atrial myocytes. Circ. Res.
71: 535–546, 1992.

43. Salata, J. J., N. K. Jurkiewicz, B. Jow, K. Folander, P. J.
Guinosso, Jr., B. Raynor, R. Swanson, and B. Fermini. IK of
rabbit ventricle is composed of two currents: evidence for IKs. Am.
J. Physiol. 271 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 40): H2477–H2489, 1996.

44. Sanguinetti, M. C., and N. K. Jurkiewicz. Two components of
cardiac delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ current. J. Gen. Physiol. 96: 195–
215, 1990.

45. Sanguinetti, M. C., and N. K. Jurkiewicz. Delayed rectiﬁer
outward K⫹ current is composed of two currents in guinea pig
atrial cells. Am. J. Physiol. 260 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 29): H393–
H399, 1991.

46. Schneider, M., T. Proebstle, V. Hombach, A. Hannekum,
and R. Rudel. Characterization of the sodium currents in
isolated human cardiocytes. Pﬂu¨ gers Arch. 428: 84–90, 1994.

47. Shibata, E. F., T. Drury, H. Refsum, V. Aldrete, and W. Giles.
Contributions of a transient outward current to repolarization in
human atrium. Am. J. Physiol. 257 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 26):
H1773–H1781, 1989.

48. Snyders, D. J., K. M. Knoth, S. L. Roberts, and M. M.
Tamkun. Time-, voltage-, and state-dependent block by quini-
dine of a cloned human cardiac potassium channel. Mol. Pharma-
col. 41: 322–330, 1992.

49. Sun, H., N. Leblanc, and S. Nattel. Mechanisms of inactiva-
tion of L-type calcium channels in human atrial myocytes. Am. J.
Physiol. 272 (Heart Circ. Physiol. 41): H1625–H1635, 1997.

50. Trautwein, W., D. G. Kassebaum, R. M. Nelson, and H. H.
Hecht. Electrophysiological study of human heart muscle. Circ.
Res. 10: 306–312, 1962.

50a.Varghese, A., and G. R. Sell. A conservation principle and its
effect on the formulation of Na-Ca exchanger current in cardiac
cells. J. Theor. Biol. 189: 33–40, 1997.

51. Van Dam, R. T., and D. Durrer. Excitability and electrical
activity of human myocardial strips from the left atrial append-
age in cases of rheumatic mitral stenosis. Circ. Res. 9: 509–514,
1961.

52. Varro, A., P. P. Nanasi, and D. A. Lathrop. Potassium currents
in isolated human atrial and ventricular cardiocytes. Acta Physiol.
Scand. 149: 133–142, 1993.

53. Wang, Z., B. Fermini, and S. Nattel. Sustained depolarization-
induced outward current in human atrial myocytes: evidence for
a novel delayed rectiﬁer potassium current similar to Kv1.5
cloned channel currents. Circ. Res. 73: 1061–1076, 1993.

54. Wang, Z., B. Fermini, and S. Nattel. Delayed rectiﬁer outward
current and repolarization in human atrial myocytes. Circ. Res.
73: 276–285, 1993.

55. Wang, Z., B. Fermini, and S. Nattel. Rapid and slow compo-
nents of delayed rectiﬁer current in human atrial myocytes.
Cardiovasc. Res. 28: 1540–1546, 1994.

56. Wang, Z., L. C. Pelletier, M. Talajic, and S. Nattel. Effects of
ﬂecainide and quinidine on human atrial action potentials: role
of rate-dependence and comparison with guinea pig, rabbit, and
dog tissues. Circulation 82: 274–283, 1990.

57. Wendt, D. J., C. F. Starmer, and A. O. Grant. Na-channel
kinetics remain stable during perforated-patch recording. Am. J.
Physiol. 263 (Cell Physiol. 32): C1234–C1240, 1992.

58. Wier, G. W. Calcium transients during excitation-contraction
coupling of mammalian heart. In: The Heart and Cardiovascular
System, edited by H. A. Fozzard. New York: Raven, 1992, p.
1223–1248.

59. Wilders, R., H. J. Jongsma, and A. O. G. Van Ginneken.
Pacemaker activity of the rabbit sinoatrial node. A comparison of
mathematical models. Biophys. J. 60: 1202–1216, 1991.

60. Winslow, R. L., A. Varghese, D. Noble, C. Adlakha, and A.
Hoythya. Generation and propagation of ectopic beats induced
by spatially localized Na-K pump inhibition in atrial network
models. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 254: 55–61, 1993.

61. Zeng, J., K. R. Laurita, D. S. Rosenbaum, and Y. Rudy. Two
components of the delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ current in ventricular
myocytes of the guinea pig type. Circ. Res. 77: 140–152, 1995.

62. Zeng, J., and Y. Rudy. Early afterdepolarizations in cardiac
myocytes: mechanism and rate dependence. Biophys. J. 68:
949–964, 1995.

