Models of Respiratory Rhythm Generation in the Pre-Bo¨tzinger
Complex. I. Bursting Pacemaker Neurons

ROBERT J. BUTERA, JR.,1,2 JOHN RINZEL,1–3 AND JEFFREY C. SMITH1
1Cellular and Systems Neurobiology Section, Laboratory of Neural Control, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health; 2Mathematical Research Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; 3Center for Neural Science and Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York City, New York 10013

Butera, Robert J., Jr., John Rinzel, and Jeffrey C. Smith. Models
of respiratory rhythm generation in the pre-Bo¨tzinger complex. I.
Bursting pacemaker neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 81: 382–397, 1999. A
network of oscillatory bursting neurons with excitatory coupling is
hypothesized to deﬁne the primary kernel for respiratory rhythm
generation in the pre-Bo¨tzinger complex (pre-Bo¨tC) in mammals.
Two minimal models of these neurons are proposed. In model 1,
bursting arises via fast activation and slow inactivation of a persistent
Na⫹ current INaP-h. In model 2, bursting arises via a fast-activating
persistent Na⫹ current INaP and slow activation of a K⫹ current IKS.
In both models, action potentials are generated via fast Na⫹ and K⫹
currents. The two models have few differences in parameters to
facilitate a rigorous comparison of the two different burst-generating
mechanisms. Both models are consistent with many of the dynamic
features of electrophysiological recordings from pre-Bo¨tC oscillatory
bursting neurons in vitro, including voltage-dependent activity modes
(silence, bursting, and beating), a voltage-dependent burst frequency
that can vary from 0.05 to ⬎1 Hz, and a decaying spike frequency
during bursting. These results are robust and persist across a wide
range of parameter values for both models. However, the dynamics of
model 1 are more consistent with experimental data in that the burst
duration decreases as the baseline membrane potential is depolarized
and the model has a relatively ﬂat membrane potential trajectory
during the interburst interval. We propose several experimental tests
to demonstrate the validity of either model and to differentiate be-
tween the two mechanisms.

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Breathing movements in mammals are generated by net-
works of neurons in the lower brain stem that produce a
rhythmic pattern of neural activity. Recently the primary neu-
ronal kernel for rhythm generation has been located in the
pre-Bo¨tzinger complex (pre-Bo¨tC), a subregion of the ventro-
lateral medulla (Smith et al. 1991). This discovery lead to the
development of rhythmic in vitro medullary slice preparations
from neonatal and juvenile rodents (Funk et al. 1994; Ramirez
et al. 1996; Smith et al. 1991) that capture this kernel and have
become important experimental preparations for analysis of
cellular and network mechanisms of rhythm generation. Cur-
rent evidence (reviewed in Rekling and Feldman 1998; Smith
1997; Smith et al. 1995) indicates that rhythm generation in
these slice preparations, as well as in more en bloc in vitro
preparations, arises from a population of pre-Bo¨tC excitatory

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

382

interneurons with intrinsic oscillatory bursting or pacemaker-
like properties. It thus has become clear that to understand
respiratory rhythm generation, at least in vitro, mechanisms
incorporating intrinsic cellular pacemaker properties must be
analyzed. Accordingly, a new mechanistic model, the hybrid
pacemaker-network model (Smith 1997; Smith et al. 1995), has
been proposed in which rhythm arises from the dynamic in-
teractions of both intrinsic and synaptic properties within a
bilaterally distributed population of coupled bursting pace-
maker neurons. In this and the following paper (Butera et al.
1999), we present computational versions of this ‘‘hybrid’’
model that provide an initial analytic framework for analyzing
the potential roles of cellular and synaptic processes in the
generation and control of rhythm.

The hybrid pacemaker-network model departs from previous
network-based models (Balis et al. 1994; Botros and Bruce
1990; Dufﬁn 1991; Gottschalk et al. 1994; Ogilvie et al. 1992;
Rybak et al. 1997) in which respiratory rhythm has been
postulated to arise mainly from network interactions, particu-
larly inhibitory connections; synaptic interactions are proposed
to operate cooperatively with intrinsic cellular properties of
speciﬁc classes of interneurons to produce the phase transitions
required for a network-based respiratory rhythm (see Ramirez
and Richter 1996; Richter et al. 1992). In these models, rhyth-
micity ceases when synaptic inhibition is blocked. However, in
the in vitro slice and en bloc preparations, inspiratory phase
respiratory activity persists when inhibitory synaptic connec-
tions are blocked pharmacologically (Feldman and Smith
1989; Ramirez et al. 1996; Shao and Feldman 1997), and
neurons with intrinsic bursting oscillations have been identiﬁed
(Johnson et al. 1994; Smith et al. 1991). In the hybrid model,
inhibitory interactions are not essential; thus the fundamental
difference between this model and previous models is that a
population of synaptically coupled excitatory pacemaker-like
neurons generates the inspiratory phase of respiratory network
activity. This rhythm and inspiratory burst-generating kernel is
embedded in a complex network, however, that provides ex-
citatory and inhibitory synaptic mechanisms for control of
oscillatory bursting as well as for generation of the complete
pattern of respiratory network activity including the phasic
ﬁring of neurons during expiration (see discussion in Smith
1997; Smith et al. 1995). Our focus in this and the following
paper is on modeling the rhythm and inspiratory burst-gener-
ating kernel operating in vitro. These models serve as the basis
for the development of a more complete hybrid model of the

RESPIRATORY PACEMAKER NEURONS

383

respiratory network incorporating both rhythm-generating ker-
nel and pattern-formation networks (Smith 1997) that must be
included to account for inspiratory and expiratory patterns of
activity in vitro and in vivo.

There currently is limited experimental information on the
ionic and synaptic mechanisms generating and controlling the
rhythmic bursting of pre-Bo¨tC pacemaker cells. We therefore
have formulated minimal models for the pacemaker neurons
with reduced parameter sets that nevertheless retain the essence
of what has been measured or hypothesized for the cellular
properties and synaptic interactions. Our objective has been to
formulate the models in a way that facilitates exploration of
general principles and mechanisms for oscillatory burst gener-
ation. In this paper, we present our pacemaker neuron models
and address questions about membrane conductance mecha-
nisms that may underlie the voltage-dependent oscillatory be-
havior of the candidate pre-Bo¨tC pacemaker neurons found in
vitro. We conducted a systematic analysis of potential mech-
anisms regulating oscillatory bursting, burst frequency, and
burst duration at the single neuron level. We also have derived
tests that allow several general mechanisms to be distinguished
that will guide experimental measurements. In the succeeding
paper (Butera et al. 1999), we extend the analysis to the cell
population level and consider a population of synaptically
coupled bursting pacemaker neurons—a model of the inspira-
tory rhythm-generating kernel in in vitro preparations. We
address a number of issues about the dynamics of this pace-
maker network kernel,
including how bursting of neurons
within the population is synchronized and how synaptic inter-
actions and intrinsic cellular properties dynamically regulate
inspiratory burst frequency and duration. Preliminary reports
of these modeling results have been presented in condensed
form (Butera et al. 1997b, 1998a,b).

M E T H O D S

All simulations were performed on IBM RS/6000 or Pentium-based
UNIX/LINUX workstations. Most simulations were coded in the C
programming language using the numerical
integration package
CVODE (Cohen and Hindmarsh 1996) available at http://netlib.
cs.utk.edu/ode/cvode.tar.Z. For ﬁnal simulations, relative and absolute
error tolerances were ⱕ10⫺6 for all state variables. Some simulations
also were performed using the interactive differential equation simu-
lation package XPP available at ftp://ftp.math.pitt.edu/pub/bardware.

Model development

The primary features of oscillatory bursting of the candidate in-
spiratory pacemaker neurons in the pre-Bo¨tC (recorded from in vitro
transverse medullary slice preparations from neonatal rat) are illus-
trated in Fig. 1 (see also Koshiya and Smith 1999; Smith et al. 1991).
After block of synaptic transmission by low-Ca2⫹ conditions in the
slice bathing medium, the neuron exhibits voltage-dependent oscilla-
tory bursting behavior. As the cell is depolarized by a steady applied
current under whole cell current clamp, the cell undergoes a transition
from a state of rest to a state of oscillatory bursting. As the cell is
depolarized further, the burst period, as well as the burst duration (Fig.
1B), decreases. Additional depolarization maintains the cell above the
action potential threshold and causes a transition to a state of beating
(i.e., tonic spiking). Another salient feature is a steadily decreasing
spike frequency throughout the duration of the burst (see Fig. 1B) (see
also the spike-frequency histograms of Johnson et al. 1994). Thus
these neurons are presumed to have multiple functional states (quies-
cence, oscillatory bursting, and beating); they have been referred to as

FIG. 1. Example of voltage-dependent properties of pre-Bo¨tzinger complex
(pre-Bo¨tC) inspiratory bursting neurons. Traces show whole cell patch-clamp
recordings from a single candidate pacemaker neuron in the pre-Bo¨tC of a
400-␮m-thick neonatal rat transverse medullary slice with rhythmically active
respiratory network. Recordings in A and B were obtained respectively before
and after block of synaptic transmission by low Ca2⫹ conditions identical to
those described in Johnson et al. (1994) (i.e., 0.2 mM Ca2⫹, 4 mM Mg2⫹, 9
mM K⫹ in slice bathing solution). Patch pipette solution and procedure for
whole cell recording were as described previously (Smith et al. 1991, 1992).
Before block of synaptic transmission, the neuron bursts in synchrony with the
inspiratory phase of network activity as monitored by the inspiratory discharge
recorded on the hypoglossal (XII) nerve (Smith et al. 1991). After block of
synaptic activity (30 min under low-Ca2⫹ conditions), the cell exhibits intrinsic
voltage-dependent oscillatory behavior. As the cell is depolarized by constant
applied current, it undergoes a transition from silence (baseline potential below
⫺65 mV, left) to oscillatory bursting to beating (baseline potential above ⫺45
mV, right). In the bursting regime, the burst period and duration decreases (see
expanded time-base traces in B) as the baseline membrane potential is depo-
larized.

conditional pacemaker neurons (Smith 1997; Smith et al. 1991, 1995)
to indicate that particular conditions must exist (ranges of depolariza-
tion level or magnitudes of burst-generating conductances) for oscil-
latory pacemaker-like bursting to occur.

In investigating the biophysical basis of these features, a fast
depolarizing mechanism for burst initiation and a slower opposing
mechanism for burst termination must be considered. In the two
models developed in the following text, initiation occurs by the
activation of a persistent Na⫹ current (INaP). However, burst termi-
nation in the two models occurs by contrasting mechanisms. In model
1, burst
termination occurs by the slow-inactivation of INaP-h, a
persistent Na⫹-current with slow inactivation. In model 2, a slowly
activating K⫹-current (IKS) is responsible for burst termination. Re-
sults for both models will be presented in this paper. These models

384

R. J. BUTERA, J. RINZEL, AND J. C. SMITH

FIG. 2. Gating and I-V characteristics of
components of models 1 and 2. A: spike gen-
3 (V) and h⬁(V) of INa and
erating kinetics. m⬁
n(V) of IK: note that h ⫽ 1 ⫺ n. B1:
n⬁(V) and ␶
gating characteristics of INaP: m⬁(V), h⬁(V),
and ␶
h(V) (bold). Left: y axis scale for steady-
state gating functions. Right: y axis scale for
h(V). B2: I-V plots of INaP for h ⫽ h⬁(V) and
␶
h ⫽ 1. First case results in a small window
current at subthreshold potentials. Second case
corresponds to INaP-h with complete removal of
inactivation. C1: gating characteristics of IKS:
k⬁(V) and ␶
k(V) (bold). Left: y axis scale for
activation function; right: y axis scale for
⫹ IKS for k ⫽ k⬁(V)
␶
k(V). C2: I-V plots of INaP
and k ⫽ 0. First case results in a small current
at subthreshold potentials. Second case corre-
sponds to INaP with complete removal of the
opposing IKS.

cover the two major mechanisms (slow inactivation of inward current,
slow activation of outward current) for ‘‘type I bursting’’ (Bertram et
al. 1995a; Rinzel and Lee 1987) to occur in oscillatory cells. Detailed
justiﬁcation for our choices of conductance mechanisms is presented
in the DISCUSSION.
FORMULATION OF MODEL 1. Our minimal model is based on a
single-compartment Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) formalism. The model’s
dynamics are described completely by an autonomous set of differ-
ential equations. The time course of the membrane potential is ob-
tained by applying Kirchoff’s current law to a single compartment
neuron. In this case, the transmembrane current is equal to the sum of
the intrinsic and externally applied currents, as follows:

C

dV
dt

⫽ ⫺INaP ⫺ INa ⫺ IK ⫺ IL ⫺ Itonic-e ⫹ Iapp

(1)

where C is the whole cell capacitance (pF), V is membrane potential
(mV), and t is time (ms). The ionic currents on the right-hand side are
described in the following text. C is set to 21 pF, consistent with
whole cell capacitance measurements from inspiratory neurons in
vitro (Smith et al. 1992).

The conductances of the ionic currents are regulated by voltage-
dependent activation and inactivation variables. The dynamics of a
gating variable x are described according to

dx
dt

⫽

x⬁(V) ⫺ x

␶x(V)

x⬁(V) ⫽ {1 ⫹ exp[(V ⫺ ␪x)/␴x]}⫺1

␶x ⫽ ␶៮ x/cosh [(V ⫺ ␪x)/(2␴x)]

(2)

(3)

(4)

where x⬁(V) is the steady-state voltage-dependent (in)activation func-
tion of x and ␶
x(V) is the voltage-dependent time constant. x⬁(V) is a
sigmoid with a half-(in)activation at V ⫽ ␪
x and a slope that is
proportional to 1/␴
x(V) is a bell-shaped curve that has a maximal
value ␶៮
x at V ⫽ ␪
x and a half-width determined by ␴
x. Thus each
gating variable is described by only three parameters. The preceding
formulation also may be expressed in the HH formalism dx/dt ⫽
x(V)(1 ⫺ x) ⫺ ␤
␣
x)]

x)]exp[⫺(V ⫺ ␪

x(V)x, where ␣

x(V) ⫽ [1/(2␶៮

x)/2␴

x)/(2␴

x(V) ⫽ [1/(2␶៮

x)]exp[(V ⫺ ␪

and ␤
x)]. This is the simplest pos-
sible formulation for the voltage dependency of ␣(V) and ␤(V), and
corresponds to assuming a single rate-limiting energy barrier between
the open and close states of the channel (Jack et al. 1975).

Action potentials in the model are generated by a fast Na⫹ current
(INa) and a delayed-rectiﬁer K⫹ current (IK). The equations for these
currents are inspired by the HH-formulation, but the gating variables
satisfy a reduced voltage-dependent description

INa ⫽ g៮ Nam⬁

3 (V)(1 ⫺ n)(V ⫺ ENa)

IK ⫽ g៮ Kn4(V ⫺ EK)

(5)

(6)

K

Na

⫽ 28 nS, ENa

⫽ 50 mV, ␪
m

⫽ ⫺4 mV, ␶៮
n

⫽ ⫺85 mV, ␪
n

⫽ ⫺29 mV, ␴
n

⫽ ⫺5 mV and the parameters of IK are g៮

where the parameters of INa are g៮
⫽
⫺34 mV, and ␴
⫽ 11.2
m
⫽ 10 ms. The
nS, EK
formulation for INa includes two simpliﬁcations compared with the
standard HH formulation. First, it is assumed that m activates so fast
that it can be considered to be instantaneous without signiﬁcantly
altering the dynamics of the model (Krinskii and Kokoz 1973; Rinzel
1985). Second, the time course of h is assumed to be of similar
dynamics as n and is approximated by h ⫽ 1 ⫺ n (Krinskii and Kokoz
3 (V) and
1973; Rinzel 1985). The voltage-dependent functions for m⬁
h⬁(V) for INa and n⬁
n(V) for IK are illustrated in Fig. 2A.
Quantitative measurements of the gating characteristics of INa and IK
have not been made in respiratory neurons, and we are omitting other
ionic currents that may modulate spike activity. Therefore we have
chosen a minimal formulation that generates spike frequencies that are
consistent with experimental recordings. Our formulation for INaP-h in
model 1 is identical to that for INaP in model 2 except that INaP-h also
has the inactivation term h. The following discussion regarding the
activation parameters of INaP-h applies to INaP (in model 2) as well.
INaP-h is of the form

4 (V) and ␶

INaP-h ⫽ g៮ NaPm⬁(V)h(V ⫺ ENa)

(7)

NaP

⫽ 6 mV, ␶៮
h

⫽ 2.8 nS, ␪
m

where g៮
⫽ ⫺40 mV, ␴
⫽ ⫺48 mV,
m
⫽ 50 mV. The activation m is
␴
h
approximated as instantaneous because it occurs on a time scale of
several milliseconds, which is several orders of magnitude faster than

⫽10,000 ms, and ENa

⫽ ⫺6 mV, ␪
h

RESPIRATORY PACEMAKER NEURONS

385

⫽ g៮

Figure 2B1 illustrates the functions m⬁(V), h⬁(V), and ␶

the time scale of h. Our characterization of the activation (m) and
inactivation (h) of INaP-h is distinct from that of INaP, where similar
variable names were used. Throughout the rest of this text, any
reference to h will always refer to the inactivation of INaP-h and not INa.
h(V) for
INaP-h. Figure 2B2 illustrates INaP-h when h ⫽ h⬁(V) and h ⫽ 1. This
ﬁgure predicts the INaP-h that we expect would be elicited under
voltage clamp by starting at a hyperpolarized membrane potential and
applying a slow voltage ramp and a fast voltage ramp, respectively,
when all other intrinsic membrane currents are eliminated. Model 1
L(V ⫺ EL). This
also has a passive leakage current IL, deﬁned as IL
current is K⫹ dominated. The nominal parameters for IL are g៮
⫽ 2.8
nS and EL

⫽⫺65 mV.

The pacemaker neurons in the pre-Bo¨tC are proposed to receive
both excitatory and inhibitory input from populations of tonically
ﬁring cells (see discussions in Smith 1997; Smith et al. 1995). For
simplicity we only consider a mean level of excitatory input, repre-
sented by the conductance gtonic-e, although analogous results are
obtained if a mean level of inhibitory input is considered as well.
Synaptic input from this beating population is assumed to be mediated
by non-N-methyl-D-aspartate (non-NMDA) glutamatergic receptors
⫽ gtonic-e(V ⫺
(Funk et al. 1993; Smith et al. 1995), modeled as Itonic-e
Esyn-e), where Esyn-e is 0 mV, the reversal potential of non-NMDA
glutamatergic synaptic currents. Throughout this paper Itonic-e is con-
⫽ 0 nS) unless otherwise indicated.
sidered to be inactive (gtonic-e
Itonic-e is intended only to represent external tonic drive and not the
more complex phasic synaptic interactions of these bursting neurons
within the pacemaker population (modeled in the companion paper) or
other types of modulatory synaptic inputs.

L

The applied stimulus current Iapp is included for completeness and

is set to 0 pA unless otherwise noted.
FORMULATION OF MODEL 2. Because there are not sufﬁcient quan-
titative data to fully constrain our parameter choices, we formulated
model 2 as similar as possible to model 1, enabling a fair and complete
assessment of the dynamic behavior of both models. In model 2, we
introduce an additional slow K⫹ current, IKS. Thus the current balance
equation is

C

dV
dt

⫽ ⫺INaP ⫺ IKS ⫺ INa ⫺ IK ⫺ IL ⫺ Itonic-e ⫹ Iapp

(8)

where C is the same as in model 1. The ionic currents INa, IK, IL,
Itonic-e, and Iapp are identical to those in model 1. INaP is identical
to INaP-h in model 1 except that it does not possess the inactivation
term h.

IKS ⫽ g៮ KSk(V ⫺ EK)

(9)

⫽ 5.6 nS, ␪
k

⫽ ⫺6 mV, ␶៮
k

⫽ ⫺38 mV, ␴
k

where g៮
⫽ 10,000 ms,
KS
⫽ ⫺85 mV. The voltage dependency of the gating kinetics for
and EK
k was chosen so that IKS was activated by the ﬁring of action
potentials and was also dynamically active in the subthreshold poten-
tial range from ⫺60 to ⫺45 mV. Figure 2C1 illustrates k⬁(V) and
⫹ IKS when k ⫽ k⬁(V) (slow voltage
␶
k(V). Figure 2C2 illustrates INaP
ramp with other membrane currents eliminated) and k ⫽ 0 (removal
of IKS, similar to a fast voltage ramp). The shapes of these plots of
INaP

⫹ IKS are similar to those of INaP-h illustrated in Fig. 2B2.

The slow variables h in model 1 and k in model 2 have been
modeled as voltage-dependent processes based on the existence of
oscillatory bursting inspiratory neurons in a low Ca2⫹ medium (John-
son et al. 1994). However, it is not essential for burst generation that
gating processes depend directly on membrane potential. For exam-
ple, similar dynamics may be achieved from models 1 and 2 if the
slow gating variables were driven by the accumulation and removal of
an intracellular ion such as Ca2⫹, although such a mechanism is not
suggested by current experimental data.

R E S U L T S

Voltage-dependent behavior

L

⫽ g៮

⌬EL).

There are several methods through which the level of depo-
larization, and thus the model of activity exhibited by the
bursting neurons, may be controlled. Some of these methods
are illustrated in Fig. 3. Note that changing Iapp to control the
neuron’s level of depolarization is equivalent to varying EL
(Iapp

Figure 4 illustrates the effect of varying EL on the oscillatory
activity of model 1. The time course of membrane potential is
illustrated in Fig. 4A, 1– 4, and the time course of the INaP-h
inactivation (h) and instantaneous membrane conductance are
illustrated in Fig. 4B, 1– 4. As EL is increased, the model makes
a transition from silence (A1) to bursting (A, 2 and 3). One
burst cycle consists of an active phase, denoted by the repeti-
tive ﬁring of action potentials, and a silent phase, where the
membrane potential varies slowly at a hyperpolarized value.
The duration of the active phase is referred to as the burst
duration, and the duration of the silent phase is referred to as
the interburst interval. The burst period is the sum of the burst
duration and interburst interval. The burst period and burst
duration decrease and the cell becomes less hyperpolarized
during the silent phase as EL is increased. Vmin, the minimum
membrane potential encountered during the silent phase of the
burst cycle, varies from ⫺58 mV at the onset of bursting
⫽ ⫺57 mV) at the
activity (EL
transition between bursting and beating activity. At all levels of
depolarization the spike frequency decreases throughout the
burst (e.g., Fig. 4, C, 2 and 3, D, 2 and 3). As the cell model
becomes further depolarized, it undergoes a transition to tonic
beating behavior (A4). All of these features are similar to those
shown in the experimental recording of Fig. 1. During bursting,
INaP-h is inactivated progressively with the ﬁring of each action
potential (Fig. 4D, 2 and 3). During the interburst phase,
inactivation is removed and the instantaneous membrane con-
ductance gradually increases as INaP-h recovers from inactiva-
tion. Similar results to those in Fig. 4A are obtained if EL is
separated into K⫹ and Na⫹ components and EK is varied.

⫽ ⫺60.5 mV) to ⫺48 mV (EL

Modulating the level of tonic drive can bias the neurons to
different activity modes. This is analyzed in our model by
varying gtonic-e, which represents the mean level of excitatory

FIG. 3. Mechanisms for controlling voltage-dependent activity in a single
bursting neuron. Baseline membrane potential of the model may be controlled
by application of an extrinsic current pulse (Iapp), changing [K⫹]o (which in
turn affects EK) or adjusting the level of tonic synaptic input, the mean level
of which is represented by gtonic-e.

386

R. J. BUTERA, J. RINZEL, AND J. C. SMITH

FIG. 4. Dynamic response of model 1 as a function of EL. Left: (A, 1– 4) membrane potential. Middle: (B, 1– 4) instantaneous
⫽ ⫺65, ⫺60, ⫺57.5, and ⫺54 mV for 1– 4,
membrane conductance (gm) and inactivation of INaP-h (h) as cell is depolarized (EL
respectively). C2/D2 and C3/D3: expanded time course of V and h and the spike-frequency proﬁle (E) during 1 burst in A2/B2 and
A3/B3. Instantaneous conductance plots are truncated during the ﬁring of action potentials.

input to the bursting neuron population from a tonically beating
cell population (Fig. 3). The depolarizing effects of gtonic-e on
the mode of activity and pattern of bursting are similar to those
of EL (quantiﬁed in the following text).

Figure 5 illustrates the effect of varying EL on the oscillatory
activity of model 2. The time course of membrane potential is
illustrated in Fig. 5A, 1– 4, and the time course of the IKS
activation and instantaneous membrane conductance are illus-
trated in B, 1– 4. The dynamics of model 2 are similar in many
respects to model 1. As EL is increased, the model progresses
through regimes of silence, bursting, and beating activity.
During oscillatory bursting, the burst is initiated by INaP and
terminates when IKS has been activated sufﬁciently. The spike
frequency decays throughout the active phase of the burst. The
current IKS is activated slowly and progressively with the ﬁring
of each action potential and deactivates during the interburst
interval. The instantaneous membrane conductance (gm) de-
creases throughout most of the silent phase and increases
toward the end of the phase. This differs from model 1, where
gm steadily increases throughout the silent phase. This differ-
ence in the time course of gm may provide a means for
differentiating between the mechanisms of the two models in
vitro (see DISCUSSION).

The dynamics of model 2 were investigated across a wide
range of parameters for IKS and INaP. For all parameter ranges
where bursting activity was supported, we found three key
differences from the dynamics of model 1. The membrane
potential trajectory was not as ﬂat during the interburst inter-
val, the burst duration did not decrease with depolarization
(Fig. 8), and gm did not exhibit a monotonic trend during the
silent phase.

Robustness of frequency control

Models 1 and 2 support burst frequencies that vary over at
least an order of magnitude with EL or gtonic-e, and this range
of burst frequencies is robust across a range of parameter
values. Figure 6 quantiﬁes these effects for model 1 for various
values of g៮
NaP. The burst duration, burst period, and frequency
of bursting and beating are plotted as EL (Fig. 6A) and gtonic-e
(Fig. 6B) are varied. Equivalent values of Iapp with EL ﬁxed to
⫺65 mV are also shown on A.

In both panels, there is a minimum value of g៮

NaP for which
oscillatory bursting can occur. If g៮
NaP is too low, the only
supported modes of activity are quiescence and beating as
shown for model 1 in Fig. 7. For all values of gNaP where

RESPIRATORY PACEMAKER NEURONS

387

FIG. 5. Dynamic response of model 2 as a function of EL. Left: (A, 1– 4) membrane potential. Right: (B, 1– 4) instantaneous
⫽ ⫺65, ⫺59.5, ⫺50, and ⫺40 mV for 1– 4,
membrane conductance (g) and activation of IKS (k) as cell is depolarized (EL
respectively). C2/D2 and C3/D3: expanded time course of V and k and the spike-frequency proﬁle (E) during 1 burst in A2/B2 and
A3/B3. Instantaneous conductance plots are truncated during the ﬁring of action potentials.

oscillatory bursting occurs, the burst frequency may be varied
by approximately an order of magnitude, and the burst period
and burst duration decrease as the neuron is depolarized. This
is consistent with the data illustrated in Fig. 1. Increasing g៮
NaP
increases the dynamic range of values of EL where bursting is
supported. We also have observed (not shown) that increasing
g៮
NaP increases the range of values of Vmin encountered as a
function of EL during oscillatory bursting. At a given level of
EL, increasing g៮

NaP increases burst frequency.

NaP and g៮

Figure 8 quantiﬁes the effects of EL on model 2 bursting for
a range of values of the subthreshold conductances g៮
NaP and
g៮
KS. For all values of g៮
KS shown, the model possesses
regimes of silent, bursting, and beating activity. During burst-
ing activity, the burst period decreases as the neuron is depo-
larized. However, the parameterization of the dynamics of
model 2 by EL differed from that of model 1 in several ways.
First, the burst duration increased slightly with depolarization.
Second, during tonic ﬁring model 2 could not achieve spike
frequencies as low as those obtained in model 1. Third, model
2 supported bursting over a range of EL (and Iapp) approxi-
mately twice as large as the range of EL where bursting
occurred in model 1. These trends persisted as the other pa-

k and ␴

rameters of the subthreshold currents (e.g., ␪
k) were
varied. Similar results were obtained when gtonic-e was varied.
The large range of Iapp in model 2 may be attributed to the
difference in whole cell conductance (gm) between the two
models. Model 2 has an additional conductance, g៮
KS, which is
not present in model 1. This conductance is activated during
bursting and beating. The increased gm means that the ‘‘gain’’
of the cell is decreased. A larger increment in Iapp is required
to achieve a given increment in depolarization. This is why the
frequency-current curves in Fig. 8 are ﬂatter and extend over a
larger Iapp range than those in Fig. 6.

NaP and g៮

The critical input levels for the transitions between activity
modes (i.e., from silence to bursting and bursting to beating),
show distinct dependencies on the conductances g៮
KS.
In both models (1 and 2), the critical value of EL or Iapp that
changes the cell from quiescence to bursting is quite sensitive
NaP. The persistent Na⫹ current is the primary voltage-
to g៮
dependent current (in model 1, the only one) that begins to
activate in the subthreshold regime. At hyperpolarized volt-
ages, these Na⫹ channels have a low open probability (expo-
nentially small with decreasing V) and the input resistance is
high. Thus excitability and the critical level of input needed for

388

R. J. BUTERA, J. RINZEL, AND J. C. SMITH

FIG. 6.

Intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms for fre-
quency control in model 1. Panels show effect of
varying EL (A) and gtonic-e (B) on burst duration, burst
period, burst frequency, and beat frequency. These
curves were calculated for multiple values of g៮
NaP.
Bursting activity does not occur for g៮
⫽ 2.0 nS in
A and for g៮
⫽ 2.0 and 2.4 nS in B. IAPP below EL
scale shows equivalent variation in IAPP with EL ﬁxed
to ⫺65 mV.

NaP

NaP

NaP. In model 2, g៮

bursting is strongly inﬂuenced by how many channels there are
per unit area, i.e., by g៮
KS affects this critical
level only modestly, partly because the driving force for g៮
KS is
much lower than that of g៮
NaP and partly because it possesses
slow (compared with INaP) activation kinetics and is relatively
inactive at subthreshold voltages. At the bursting-to-beating
transition, the cell is depolarized and conductances are well
activated. Thus the extra sensitivity to g៮
NaP due to high input
resistance and low channel activation that we see at the silence
to bursting transition is diminished here. The critical levels for
EL and Iapp are almost independent of g៮
NaP. The transition is
affected by g៮
KS because this current controls burst termination
(Fig. 5B3). Although these sensitivities for the silence to burst-
ing transition can be understood qualitatively by considering
the subthreshold currents (Isub, see following text) alone, the
corresponding sensitivities for the bursting to beating transition

Intrinsic modes of single-cell activity of model 1 as a function of
FIG. 7.
g៮
NaP and EL. When g៮
NaP exceeds 2.2 nS, the model neuron exhibits 3 func-
tional states: silent, oscillatory bursting, and beating. Below 2.2 nS, oscillatory
bursting does not occur at any level of EL. Range of g៮
NaP used in the ﬁgure
spans those values used in the simulations presented in this and the companion
paper (Butera et al. 1999).

are difﬁcult to intuit because the components of Isub interact
with the spike generating currents.

Mechanism for mode transitions and frequency control

⬅ IL

⫹ INaP-h for model 1, Isub

In this section, we offer a qualitative biophysical description
of how control of the baseline membrane potential, illustrated
by varying EL, alters the activity mode (silence, bursting, and
beating as shown in Figs. 4 and 5) of both models. The activity
modes exhibited by the model are explained by using steady-
state (SS) and quasi-steady-state (QSS) I-V curves of the sub-
⬅ IL
threshold currents (Isub
⫹INaP
⫹ IKS for model 2). This explanation sufﬁces because
without the action potential currents INa and IK, reduced mod-
els having only the Isub currents display oscillatory and non-
oscillatory states (hyperpolarized silence, oscillatory activity,
depolarized silence) that are qualitatively similar to those in the
corresponding full models. Figure 9 illustrates I-V curves cor-
responding to Isub in cases shown in Figs. 4 and 5. The SS
curves (thick lines) represent Isub versus V when the slow
negative feedback process (h inactivation for model 1, k acti-
vation for model 2) is set to steady state [(i.e., h ⫽ h⬁(V) in
model 1, and k ⫽ k⬁(V) in model 2]). The QSS curves (thin
lines) represent Isub versus V when the slow process (h or k) is
ﬁxed to a particular value. These curves are generally N-
shaped, revealing the regenerative nature of the persistent
sodium current. For the remainder of this section, we will only
discuss model 1 (Fig. 9A, 1–4). An analogous explanation
sufﬁces for model 2.

For all values of EL the SS I-V curves have a single positive-
sloped crossing of the 0 nA axis. This crossing is an equilib-
rium state that may be stable or unstable. If stable, the equi-
librium state corresponds to the model’s resting potential.
However, stability is not governed only by the slope’s sign at
the zero crossing. If all voltage-dependent conductances vary
on time scales faster than the membrane time constant
(CM/gm), then a positive slope implies stability. When the
time scales are signiﬁcantly disparate (such as h, which has

RESPIRATORY PACEMAKER NEURONS

389

FIG. 8. Mechanisms for frequency control in
model 2. Panels show effect of varying EL on burst
duration, burst period, burst frequency, and beat
frequency of model 2. These curves were calcu-
lated for multiple values of g៮
KS (B).
IAPP below EL scale shows equivalent variation in
IAPP with EL ﬁxed to ⫺65 mV.

NaP (A) and g៮

a time constant of seconds), SS I-V curves may not correctly
predict stability, although stability may be inferred through
the use of QSS I-V curves. When the QSS I-V curve has a

positive crossing of the 0 nA axis, the model is stable at
that membrane potential at that particular value of h (i.e., as
if h was clamped at the value). Neither the SS I-V nor QSS

⫹ IKS

FIG. 9. Subthreshold currents of model 1 (INaP-h

⫹ IL) (left) and
⫹ IL) (right) as EL is varied. Values of EL
model 2 (INaP
correspond to values used in Figs. 4 and 5 and are ⫺65, ⫺60,
⫺57.5, and ⫺54 mV (A, 1– 4) and ⫺65, ⫺59.5, ⫺50, and ⫺40 mV
(B, 1– 4). Thick lines are steady-state I-V curves [h ⫽ h⬁(V) in A,
1– 4, k ⫽ k⬁(V) in B, 1– 4]. Thin I-V plots are quasi-steady-state
(QSS) I-V curves, where the slow variable h (A, 1– 4) or k (B, 1– 4)
is ﬁxed to a particular value. In A1 and B1, these values are
indicated on the ﬁgure. In A, 2 and 3, and B, 2 and 3, these values
correspond to the values of h or k at the beginning (a) and end (b)
of the active phase of the burst cycle (I and II, top). In A4 and B4,
the QSS I-V curve was generated by setting h or k to the mean value
during tonic ﬁring (see Figs. 4B4 and 5B4).

390

R. J. BUTERA, J. RINZEL, AND J. C. SMITH

I-V curves provide any information on the dynamics of h
itself.

When EL

⫽ ⫺65 mV, the model cell is silent (as shown in
Fig. 4A1). The rest potential, at approximately ⫺62 mV where
the SS I-V curve of Isub crosses the 0 nA axis, is stable. The
equilibrium point is stable because INaP-h is relatively deacti-
vated and INaP-h cannot be adequately recruited to sustain
bursting activity. In this case the QSS I-V curves (Fig. 9A1)
show that for all values of h, even when inactivation is com-
pletely removed (h ⫽ 1), the hyperpolarized zero crossing is
stable (i.e., a positive slope).

For EL equal to ⫺60 mV (Fig. 4A2) or ⫺57.5 mV (Fig.
4A3), the model is in the bursting mode and the QSS I-V curves
change during the cycle (Gola 1974). An animated QuickTime
movie of several burst cycles, illustrating V(t), h(t), Isub(t), and
QSS I-V(V, t), is available on the World-Wide Web at http://
intra.ninds.nih.gov/smith/movie/moviejnp-99.html. Figure 9A,
2 and 3, shows Isub at the maximum (a) and minimum (b)
values of h during one complete burst cycle. The burst begins
at a value of h (a) where Isub is inward at all hyperpolarized
potentials below the action potential threshold (approximately
⫺45 mV). The cell depolarizes across the action potential
threshold and repetitive ﬁring occurs. With each action poten-
tial, h inactivates an additional small amount, and this inacti-
vation decreases the inward contribution of INaP-h to Isub,
shifting the QSS I-V curve outward. Firing persists until Isub is
net outward at Vmin, the minimum membrane potential encoun-
tered during an action potential. At this point (b), ﬁring stops,
and V falls to the hyperpolarized equilibrium point (0 nA
crossing with positive slope) of the QSS I-V curve (b). As h
gradually deinactivates, the QSS I-V curve moves inward,
depolarizing the cell as the pseudosteady equilibrium point
drifts rightward. Another burst begins when Isub is net inward
at all subthreshold potentials (a), and the hyperpolarized equi-
librium point of the QSS I-V curve disappears.

As the cell is depolarized further (from A2 to A3, Fig. 4), the
values of h encountered during one burst cycle are biased
toward smaller values, i.e., less inward current from INaP-h is
necessary to counterbalance the reduced outward current from
shifting EL. In addition, the dynamic range of h is reduced,
from a ⌬h of ⬃0.1 in Fig. 4A2 to ⬍0.02 in Fig. 4A3. This is the
essence of the voltage-dependent frequency control in the
model: as the cell is depolarized toward higher values of EL,
the cell does not hyperpolarize as far at the end of each burst
cycle, and less time is necessary to recover from inactivation of
INaP-h to begin the following burst. At all values of EL where
bursting occurs, INaP-h is active throughout the burst cycle, and
it is the cyclical variation in h that controls the cycle timing.
With still further depolarization such that the equilibrium
point of the SS I-V is above the action potential threshold, the
⫽ ⫺54
model changes to a state of tonic ﬁring (Fig. 4A4, EL
mV). For this activity mode, h is nearly constant, oscillating at
low amplitude with the action potential frequency about a
mean value. The QSS I-V curve in Fig. 9A4, generated for this
mean value of h (0.315), illustrates that on average Isub is net
inward at all subthreshold potentials during tonic spiking.

In summary, the model may be thought of as having two
voltage-dependent thresholds—a threshold for burst initiation
(approximately ⫺60 mV) and a threshold for action potential
initiation (approximately ⫺45 mV). When the equilibrium
point of the SS I-V curve is below the burst threshold, the

FIG. 10. Oscillatory model behavior in the absence of fast Na⫹ currents.
Panels show effects of setting g៮
Na to 0 in model 1 (A, 1–5) and in model 2 (B,
1–5). Parameter sets for A, 1– 4, and B, 1– 4, correspond to parameters used in
⫽
Figs. 4A, 1– 4, and 5 A, 1– 4, respectively. Parameters for A5 and B5 are EL
⫽ ⫺32 mV, respectively. - - -, ⫺60 and ⫺30 mV references.
⫺53 mV and EL

model is quiescent. When the equilibrium point is above the
action potential threshold, the model is ﬁring tonically. When
the equilibrium point is between these two values, oscillatory
bursting is likely. This explanation is only qualitative, how-
ever, and a more quantitative explanation may be provided
using bifurcation theory (e.g., Rinzel 1985).

Model predictions

In this section, we consider several other functionally im-
portant features of the models’ dynamic behaviors that we
predict should be observed experimentally.

Na

When action potentials are blocked, each model still exhibits
activity modes and transitions that are analogous to those of
our full model. Figure 10 demonstrates the models’ dynamic
responses when g៮
⫽ 0. This predicts what we expect in
experiments when INa is blocked (e.g., with QX-314 or TTX–
see DISCUSSION), and cells are depolarized progressively. For
both models, a subthreshold oscillation remains, with the
trends in burst duration, burst period, and interburst depolar-
ization consistent with those of the more complete models
(Figs. 4A, 1– 4, and 5A, 1– 4). Thus in spite of complex inter-
actions between the spike-generating currents and the sub-
threshold burst-generating currents, especially at the transition
between bursting and beating, these ﬁgures demonstrate that
the subthreshold currents generally control the burst period and
burst duration during repetitive bursting.

Cells in hyperpolarized silent mode may retain burst excit-
ability if g៮
NaP is not too small, showing single burst responses
to transient inputs. A brief depolarizing input (50 ms) of
sufﬁcient magnitude is capable of triggering a single sustained
burst lasting several hundred milliseconds (Fig. 11A). Similar
responses occur across a wide range of values of EL and g៮
NaP
where the model is initially silent, providing that g៮
NaP is not too
small. At rest, INaP-h is relatively deactivated (m is low) and
deinactivated (h is high). A brief depolarization activates
INaP-h. Because INaP-h inactivates slowly, INaP-h remains rela-
tively deinactivated and a larger conductance for INaP-h is
elicited, generating sufﬁcient inward current to trigger a single
burst. As analyzed in the companion paper (Butera et al. 1999),
such burst triggering is important for recruiting inactive cells
and achieving synchronous bursting in a synaptically coupled

RESPIRATORY PACEMAKER NEURONS

391

population of these pacemaker cells with heterogeneous prop-
erties where a substantial fraction of the population is intrin-
sically in a silent mode.

A single burst also may be elicited as a form of posthyper-
polarization rebound (Fig. 11B). A sustained hyperpolarizing
input removes some inactivation from INaP-h (i.e., h increases).
On abrupt release of the hyperpolarizing input, the model
depolarizes. Because inactivation of INaP-h develops slowly,
INaP-h has an increased conductance as V nears its rest value,
and this increased conductance may trigger a single posthyper-
polarization burst. This response may occur across a wide
range of parameters provided that the stimulus is of sufﬁcient
duration (the inactivation of INaP-h is a slow process), the
hyperpolarizing stimulus is of sufﬁcient magnitude (so that h
increases sufﬁciently), and the resting neuron is not too hyper-
polarized (so that sufﬁcient h remains to be deinactivated). For
⫽ ⫺62
example, the response of Fig. 11B was generated for EL
⫽ ⫺65 mV, the resting value of h is sufﬁciently
mV. When EL
large (0.92) that even a large hyperpolarization (to bring h
nearly to 1) does not produce an increase in the conductance of
INaP-h strong enough to elicit a posthyperpolarization burst,
unless an additional depolarizing input is coincident with the
release from hyperpolarization. Thus we predict that this re-
sponse can be elicited by hyperpolarization release only for a
window of membrane potentials that is not too hyperpolarized.
During repetitive bursting, transient inputs can reset the
rhythm. A brief (50 ms) hyperpolarizing input (10 pA) is
capable of resetting the active phase of a burst (Fig. 12). This
resetting reduces the duration of the current burst as well as the
following interburst interval. The duration of the following

FIG. 12. Resetting response. Brief but sufﬁciently strong transient hyper-
⫽ ⫺59 mV,
polarizing input can reset a burst. Simulations performed with EL
which corresponds to a burst period of ⬃4 s. Control period shown in A, with
bursts occurring at times ␣
2. Simulations in B and C were started with
identical initial conditions, and a 50-ms, 10-pA hyperpolarizing input was
applied early (b1) or late (c1) in the burst cycle. In both cases, the brief input
reset the burst with the following burst occurring earlier. Duration until the
subsequent burst was proportional to how early or late in the burst the transient
input was applied.

1 and ␣

interburst interval varies with the duration of the preceding
burst. The duration of the subsequent burst is unaffected. For
example, a transient current pulse applied early in the burst (b1)
terminates the burst, and the following interburst interval is
signiﬁcantly shortened, with the next burst ﬁring at b2. A
transient current pulse applied late in the burst (c1) also termi-
nates the burst, with the next burst ﬁring at c2. Although the
poststimulus interburst interval is shortened in both B and C,
the poststimulus interburst interval in B is shorter. This behav-
ior would be important for controlling burst cycle timing under
conditions where there is dynamic resetting by inhibitory syn-
aptic mechanisms (see discussions in Smith 1997; Smith et al.
1995).

D I S C U S S I O N

Justiﬁcation of models

FIG. 11. Transient burst responses. A: brief but sufﬁciently large transient
⫽
depolarizing input can elicit a single sustained burst. Model was at rest (EL
⫺65 mV), and depolarizing current pulses (50 ms, 10 and 15 pA) were applied.
B: transient hyperpolarizing input of sufﬁcient magnitude and duration may
⫽
elicit a single posthyperpolarization rebound burst. Model was at rest (EL
⫺62 mV), and a hyperpolarizing current pulse (500 ms, 60 pA) was applied.
In both cases, the parameters EL and g៮
NaP correspond to points in Fig. 7 to the
left of the bursting regime.

We have developed minimal models for oscillatory bursting
neurons found in the pre-Bo¨tzinger complex in vitro. Although
there is strong evidence that neurons with bursting pacemaker-
like properties are generating the respiratory rhythm in vitro, it
has not been proven that the neurons on which our models are
based, with the behavior depicted in Fig. 1, actually generate
the rhythm. Such causality remains difﬁcult to establish deﬁn-
itively experimentally. However, these cells are the only in-

392

R. J. BUTERA, J. RINZEL, AND J. C. SMITH

spiratory neurons with intrinsic pacemaker-like properties that
have been identiﬁed in the pre-Bo¨tzinger complex from elec-
trophysiological recording and mapping of neuron activity in
slice preparations (Johnson et al. 1994; Smith et al. 1991;
Koshiya and Smith 1998, 1999). They are currently candidates
for the rhythm-generating cells in vitro (see Smith et al. 1995).
Intrinsic conductances responsible for the oscillatory burst-
ing behavior of these cells have not yet been identiﬁed exper-
imentally. Furthermore there is likely to be considerable het-
erogeneity in cellular parameters for different neurons in the
rhythm-generating cell population, e.g., maximal conductances
of burst-generating currents (g៮
NaP) and baseline membrane
potentials (EL); this heterogeneity is treated in the companion
paper (Butera et al. 1999). Figure 1 only provides one example
of voltage-dependent behavior in a bursting inspiratory neuron.
Variations in properties such as the voltage range for oscilla-
tory bursting, oscillatory frequency range, and the extent to
which a given neuron in the population will exhibit oscillatory
bursting (see Functional states of pacemaker neurons), remain
to be quantiﬁed experimentally. Given the limited experimen-
tal data, we therefore have postulated a minimum set of con-
ductance mechanisms and explored a range of parameter val-
ues to determine if they can account for the observed behaviors
as well as to investigate the range of behaviors likely to be
exhibited by cells with these types of conductances. Besides
fast Na⫹ and K⫹ currents responsible for the generation of
action potentials, ionic mechanisms must be postulated for
both the initiation and termination of bursting. Although we
have assigned speciﬁc types of currents to these functions, as
justiﬁed in the following text, the models are general and are
designed to provide insights into plausible mechanisms.

In numerous invertebrate and mammalian
BURST INITIATION.
bursting neurons, the onset of bursting is caused by an inward
cationic current that activates at subthreshold potentials. This
current is responsible for maintaining the negative-slope region
of the I-V curve. T-type and persistent Ca2⫹ currents have been
implicated in burst generation in mammalian neurons (e.g.,
Llina´s 1988). Several types of Ca2⫹ currents exist in respira-
tory neurons (Onimaru et al. 1996); however, inspiratory neu-
rons have been identiﬁed which continue to undergo rhythmic
bursting under low Ca2⫹ conditions (Johnson et al. 1994) (see
also Fig. 1). This evidence suggests that Ca2⫹ currents are not
essential for the generation of bursting behavior. Therefore
although it is known that the pre-Bo¨tC oscillatory bursting cells
have Ca2⫹ currents (Koshiya and Smith 1998) and it is likely
that Ca2⫹ currents play a role in modifying a neuron’s ﬁring
properties, they are not considered in our formulation of a
minimal model for bursting activity.

Calcium-activated nonspeciﬁc cation (CAN) currents have
been implicated in playing a role in oscillatory bursting neu-
rons in Helix (Swandulla and Lux 1985) and Aplysia (Kramer
and Zucker 1985) and are ubiquitous in a variety of neuronal
preparations (see Partridge and Swandulla 1988 for review).
Their role has been postulated to maintain the active phase of
a burst. Because oscillatory pre-Bo¨tC neurons continue to burst
in a low Ca2⫹ medium, we do not consider CAN currents
necessary to maintain oscillatory bursting. In addition, because
CAN currents have conductances that are typically voltage
independent, it is unlikely that they could be responsible for

generating the rapid depolarization associated with the initia-
tion of a burst.

The mixed cationic current IH also has been implicated in
rhythmic bursting activity in a variety of neuronal preparations
(e.g., Calabrese and DeSchutter 1992; Lu¨thi and McCormick
1998; McCormick and Huguenard 1992). However, an IH
current is unlikely to be necessary because rhythmic bursting
may occur even when there is very little hyperpolarization
during the interburst interval (Fig. 1). Although IH may not be
essential for bursting, this current could be involved in regu-
lating the time course of membrane depolarization during the
interburst interval and therefore would be important for regu-
lating burst frequency. A relatively ﬂat membrane potential
trajectory could occur in the presence of IH if this current was
balanced by an outward K⫹-dominated leakage current, as
incorporated in our model, or another K⫹ leak current such as
an inward rectiﬁer (IR). IR has been shown in other prepara-
tions to be a modulatory target that regulates the frequency of
bursting (Benson and Levitan 1983; Butera et al. 1995; Drum-
mond et al. 1980) and has been proposed to be involved in the
frequency control of pre-Bo¨tC pacemaker cells (Smith et al.
1995). More experimental information is required on the mix
of subthreshold currents controlling the time course of the
interburst interval. Our model was designed to investigate a
minimal set of essential burst-generating conductance mecha-
nisms.

In light of these observations, a compelling alternative re-
mains for burst initiation: inward cationic currents that activate
at subthreshold membrane potentials. For example, a slow-
inward Ca2⫹ current has been reported in Aplysia neuron R15
that has voltage-dependent activation and a slower Ca2⫹-de-
pendent
inactivation (Adams and Levitan 1985). Because
bursting persists under low-Ca2⫹ conditions, another plausible
candidate is the persistent Na⫹ current (INaP). INaP has been
implicated in bursting behavior in rat hippocampal, hypotha-
lamic, and cortical neurons (Franceschetti et al. 1995; Li and
Hatton 1996; Llina´s 1988) and identiﬁed in a variety of other
mammalian neurons. The voltage dependence of INaP has been
quantitatively characterized in mouse and rat neocortical neu-
rons (Brown et al. 1994; Fleidervish et al. 1996; French et al.
1990). We adopted INaP as the current responsible for burst
initiation in our model. Ongoing experiments in our laboratory
seek to identify the existence of INaP or a similar subthreshold
cationic current in pre-Bo¨tC inspiratory bursting neurons.

French et al. (1990) and Brown et al. (1994) report values
for the parameters of the voltage-dependent activation of INaP:
⫽ ⫺50 and ⫺48 mV, respectively, and absolute values of
␪
m
m (⫺40 mV) is
␴
m in the range of 4 –9 mV. Our choice of ␪
depolarized from these values. However, similar voltage-de-
pendent frequency control (at more hyperpolarized potentials)
m is reduced to ⫺48 mV with a
is obtained from the model if ␪
similar shift in ␪
h. The formulation of m⬁(V) for INaP in our
model is consistent with observations from cortical neurons
where the threshold for INaP activation is ⱖ10 mV hyperpo-
larized to the threshold for INa activation (Brown et al. 1994;
Stafstrom et al. 1982) and is present in a voltage range where
most other voltage-gated currents are inactive. Thus INaP dom-
inates the excitability of the membrane at subthreshold poten-
tials (Stafstrom et al. 1982). This is evident when comparing
m(V) for INa with m⬁(V) for INaP in Fig. 2 (A and B1).

RESPIRATORY PACEMAKER NEURONS

393

Comparison of models

BURST TERMINATION. Spike-frequency histograms of pre-
Bo¨tC bursting neurons in rhythmically active slices (Johnson et
al. 1994) show that the ﬁring frequency decays throughout the
burst phase (Fig. 1). Also the initiation and termination of the
burst are accompanied by a rapid transition between the silent
phase and the ﬁring of action potentials (Fig. 1) and vice versa.
In light of theoretical studies (Bertram et al. 1995a; Rinzel
1987) of the mechanisms by which individual neurons may
exhibit bursting behavior, both of these lines of evidence
suggest that a minimal mechanism for bursting requires just
one slow recovery process, such as intracellular Ca2⫹-accumu-
lation or a slow voltage-dependent gating mechanism. Because
rhythmic bursting pre-Bo¨tC neurons have been identiﬁed in
low-Ca2⫹ preparations (Johnson et al. 1994), we postulate that
the recovery process is voltage dependent. This process could
be either a slowly inactivating inward current or a slowly
activating outward current (presumably K⫹).

Few inward cationic currents have been identiﬁed that have
voltage-dependent kinetics on the order of seconds that are
required to produce the bursting dynamics of the pre-Bo¨tC
neurons. Slow voltage-dependent inactivation of a Ca2⫹-cur-
rent has been identiﬁed in pancreatic ␤-cells with a time
constant of 2– 6 s (Hopkins et al. 1991), but a similar current
has not been identiﬁed in neuronal preparations. A persistent
Na⫹ current is the main candidate, but the slow inactivation
parameters of INaP-h have not been as well characterized; the
parameters used in our models are consistent with available
measurements. Our h⬁(V) is similar in shape to the voltage
dependency of the slow inactivation of INaP-h reported by
Fleidervish et al. (1996). The steady-state I-V plots of INaP-h in
our model (Fig. 2B2) are consistent in shape with the I-V
characteristics estimated by Fleidervish and Gutnick (1996)
during slow (2.33 mV/s) and fast (70 mV/s) voltage ramps.
When using ramps of ⱖ35 mV/s, they reported that INaP begins
to activate around ⫺60 mV and reaches a peak by ⫺25 mV.
Fleidervish and Gutnick (1996) reported the time constant for
the onset of slow inactivation of INaP-h as 2.06 s at ⫹20 mV and
the time constant for recovery from slow inactivation of INaP-h
as 2.31 s at ⫺70 mV and 1.10 s at ⫺90 mV. These points are
within the range of our model of ␶
h(V) (Fig. 2B1), although
they lie at extreme ends of the bell-shaped curve ␶
h(V). We
used a value of 10 s for ␶៮
h to produce burst periods on the time
scales that are observed experimentally.

The hypothetical burst termination mechanism in model 2
requires a slowly activating voltage-dependent K⫹ current.
Slow voltage-gated Phe-Met-Arg-Phe-NH2
(FMRF-amide)
sensitive K⫹-currents (IKF) recently have been identiﬁed in
heart interneurons in the leech (Nadim and Calabrese 1997).
This current has a time constant of several seconds. However,
K⫹ currents with similar voltage-dependent kinetics have not
yet been identiﬁed in mammalian neurons.

Although we have postulated voltage-dependent slow pro-
cesses for burst termination, it is possible that these processes
may be Ca2⫹ dependent as well because a Ca2⫹ gradient still
may exist under the low-Ca2⫹ conditions where bursting be-
havior has been observed (Johnson et al. 1994). However, our
experiences with the dynamic mechanisms of these classes of
models (see Comparison with other bursting cells) is that
dynamically similar mechanisms for bursting may be obtained
whether the slow process is voltage or Ca2⫹ dependent.

Models 1 and 2 both demonstrate several qualitative features
of the oscillatory bursting behavior of pre-Bo¨tC inspiratory
neurons. These features include voltage-dependent control of
the model activity: as the neuron is depolarized via Iapp or
gtonic-e, or varying EL (e.g., by controlling [K⫹]o), the neuron
can be biased from silence to bursting to beating activity.
During bursting, the spike-frequency decays during the burst
and the bursting frequency is strongly dependent on the level of
depolarization. However, model 1 is more consistent with our
experimental data in two respects: the membrane potential
trajectory during the interburst interval is much ﬂatter (in
membrane potential) and the burst duration decreases as the
baseline membrane potential is biased toward more depolar-
ized levels. It is possible that a more complex repertoire of
ionic currents may allow model 2 to possess a ﬂatter interburst
interval (e.g., see Smith et al. 1995). Also, it is possible that we
have not identiﬁed a possible parameter set for model 2 where
the burst duration decreases, rather than increases, with depo-
larization. Nevertheless, we have searched parameter space for
all of the parameters of the subthreshold currents (speciﬁcally,
maximal conductances and parameters responsible for the dy-
namics of the gating variables: g៮
k) in
model 2 and have not identiﬁed parameter regimes where
model 2 exhibits such behavior.

Nap, ␪

KS, g៮

m, ␴

m, ␪

k, ␴

We found that by varying additional parameters of IKS we
can mathematically transform the ionic current equations of
model 1 into a ‘‘nearly dynamically equivalent’’ model that
possess the ionic current equations of model 2. Although the
nature of this transformation is beyond the scope of this paper,
the nearly equivalent model 2 possesses a relatively ﬂat inter-
burst interval, and a burst duration that decreases with depo-
larization until near the threshold for beating. However, to
achieve these dynamics using the ionic currents of model 2, we
found it necessary to either make the reversal potential of IKS
⫺55 mV or incorporate an additional fast-activating gating
variable to IKS such that IKS is only active at membrane
potentials above ⫺55 mV. With either of these manipulations
to model 2, gm decreases throughout almost the entire silent
phase.

The relative ﬂatness of model 1’s interburst voltage time
course can be understood as follows. During the interburst
phase, the subthreshold currents are essentially balanced and
⬇ 0. Thus V is essentially at a hyper-
they sum to zero: Isub
polarized pseudo-steady-state and drifts upwards as the gating
variable [h(t) or k(t)] slowly evolves. By differentiating this
pseudo-steady-state relation, one can estimate the expected
variations in V as the slow gating variable evolves: ⌬V/⌬h or
⌬V/⌬k. For model 1, we ﬁnd that ⌬V/⌬h is proportional to INaP
(i.e., INaP-h with h ⫽ 1), while for model 2 ⌬V/⌬k is propor-
tional to g៮
KS(V ⫺ EK) (i.e., IKS with k ⫽ 1). Because INaP-h is
almost totally deactivated (m ⬇ 0) in the voltage range of the
interburst phase we see that ⌬V/⌬h is much less than ⌬V/⌬k.
This qualitative prediction of model 1’s ﬂat interburst voltage
trajectory was partial motivation for us to develop this mech-
anism early in our study. A similar argument shows that the
interburst voltage is more sensitive to Iapp in model 1 than in
model 2 by a factor of ⱖ2.

Models with a voltage- and time-dependent burst inactiva-
tion process will exhibit some depolarizing trajectory of the

394

R. J. BUTERA, J. RINZEL, AND J. C. SMITH

interburst membrane potential, as shown by model 1 and to a
greater extent by model 2. It has been speculated that postburst
hyperpolarization and depolarizing drift of interburst mem-
brane potential may be a signature of pre-Bo¨tC pacemaker cells
(see Rekling and Feldman 1998). Recordings of the candidate
pre-Bo¨tC pacemaker neurons, however, can exhibit nearly ﬂat
interburst interval trajectories (Fig. 1) (Smith et al. 1991). This
may indicate the presence of a more complex mix of subthresh-
old currents (e.g., Smith et al. 1995) and/or a nonuniform
spatial distribution of ion channels between the soma and
proximal dendrites (e.g., Li et al. 1996).

Experiments to test models

In light of the differences discussed above and the robust-
ness of the dynamics of model 1, we are inclined to present
model 1 as a more feasible mechanism for oscillatory bursting
in pre-Bo¨tC neurons. However, due to the limitations previ-
ously discussed, we must test for both mechanisms in vitro.
One test that could support or refute the ionic currents of model
1 would be to measure the membrane conductance at various
points throughout the silent phase of the cycle (Atwater and
Rinzel 1986). In model 1, the membrane conductance increases
monotonically as INaP-h recovers from inactivation (Fig. 4B,
1– 4). The recovery of h and the gradual depolarization of the
membrane potential (via the fast activation of INaP-h) both
contribute to an increase in g៮
Nap-h, and thus gm. The presence
of additional subthreshold currents with voltage-dependent
conductances (e.g., IR or IH), however, could alter this trend.
In model 2 during the silent phase of the burst cycle, there
are two competing effects with respect to gm. The deactivation
of IKS contributes toward a reduction of gm, while the mem-
brane’s gradual depolarization activates INaP, contributing to-
ward an increase in gm. Thus the overall change in gm in model
2 depends on the relative strength of INaP and IKS. In Fig. 5 it
is shown that gm decreases then increases during the silent
phase of the burst cycle.

Another test to differentiate between the two mechanisms
would be to apply a voltage-clamp prepulse to 0 mV for 10 s
and then hyperpolarize to ⫺75 mV. In model 2, the prepulse
would activate IKS, and on hyperpolarization (as long as we
hyperpolarize above EK) we would expect to see a slowly
decaying outward current. In model 1 we would not expect to
see the slow decay as long as the clamp potential was below the
activation threshold for INaP-h. Therefore the existence of a
slow current following a long depolarized prepulse would
demonstrate sufﬁciency for model 2 and would be inconclusive
for model 1.

Figure 6B quantiﬁes the effect of a mean level of tonic
synaptic drive on the behavior of model 1. This cannot be
tested directly in vitro, since the act of decoupling excitatory
synaptic connections between bursting neurons (e.g., via a low
Ca2⫹ bathing medium) also blocks tonic synaptic input to these
cells as well. However, this mechanism could be demonstrated
through the use of a dynamic clamp (Sharp et al. 1993) after
synaptic connections have been blocked. Nevertheless these
results illustrate that the depolarizing inputs of extrinsic tonic
drive have similar effects on the activity of model 1 as varying
EL or Iapp. Similar results to Fig. 6 are obtained as EK is varied
(with IL separated into Na⫹ and K⫹ components). We have
found that [K⫹]o regulates the oscillation frequency of indi-

vidual pacemaker-like cells under low-Ca2⫹ or 6-cyano-7-
nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione conditions (R. Butera, C. Del Ne-
gro, and J. Smith, unpublished data). Similar results to those
shown in Fig. 8 for model 2 are obtained as EK or gtonic-e is
varied.

The subthreshold mechanisms responsible for oscillatory
bursting in pre-Bo¨tC neurons may be elucidated more easily
experimentally if the fast Na⫹ current is blocked, as in Fig. 10.
Our models predict that a subthreshold oscillation should re-
main under these conditions, allowing differences in the tra-
jectories and voltage dependence of potential to be distin-
guished for the two models. INaP, in some mammalian neurons,
is TTX-sensitive (Fleidervish and Gutnick 1996), necessitating
block of fast Na⫹ by intracellular QX-314, although TTX-
insensitive forms of INaP also have been described (Hoehn et al.
1993; Oka 1996).

It also will be necessary for recordings from oscillatory
bursting pre-Bo¨tC neurons to possess transient responses sim-
ilar to those shown in Figs. 11 and 12. These tests will not
provide evidence in favor of model 1 or model 2 but will
simply demonstrate that either model is consistent with exper-
imental data. The responses are not unique, however, and a
more complex bursting neuron with additional slow variables
and ionic currents may possess similar responses (e.g., Butera
et al. 1995, 1997a; Demir et al. 1997). Rebound bursting has
been proposed as an important mechanism for producing tran-
sitions from inactive to active phases in neural oscillators,
particularly when there is phasic inhibition hyperpolarizing
burst-generating cells. IH and IT have been identiﬁed as ionic
mechanisms that contribute to rebound bursting, and these
currents may exist in respiratory neurons (Ramirez and Richter
1996; Richter 1996). Our models demonstrate that INaP-h is
another current mechanism promoting posthyperpolarization
bursting (Fig. 11B). This may be functionally important in the
respiratory oscillator under conditions where the pacemaker
cells are embedded in the respiratory pattern generation net-
work and receive phasic inhibitory inputs (see discussions in
Smith 1997).

Comparison with other bursting cells

Voltage-dependent frequency control of oscillatory bursting
has been described in a variety of neuronal preparations, in-
cluding neuron R15 in Aplysia (Mathieu and Roberge 1971;
Wilson 1982), neuron AB in stomatogastric ganglion (Abbott
et al. 1991), medial mammalian body (MMB) neurons in the
guinea pig hypothalamus (Alonso and Llina´s 1992), and mag-
nocellular neurons in the rat hypothalamus (Li and Hatton
1996). In all of these cases, the frequency of bursting increases,
and the baseline membrane potential is depolarized as Iapp is
increased. Similar effects of Iapp on burst frequency are exhib-
ited by models of R15 (Canavier et al. 1991) and AB (Abbott
et al. 1991; Epstein and Marder 1990).

The models presented in this paper often are described as
square-wave, or type I, bursters (Bertram et al. 1995a; Rinzel
1987). Various models of this type have been used to describe
the electrical bursting activity of pancreatic ␤-cells (Bertram et
al. 1995b; Chay and Keizer 1985; Keizer and Smolen 1991;
Sherman and Rinzel 1992). In all of these models, burst ter-
mination occurs by either a slowly activating K⫹ current or a
slowly inactivating Ca2⫹ current. Models of electrical bursting

RESPIRATORY PACEMAKER NEURONS

395

in pancreatic-␤cells that rely on either of these slow processes
have used time constants with maximal values of 30 –50 s
(Bertram et al. 1995a; Keizer and Smolen 1991; Sherman and
Rinzel 1992). The effect of membrane depolarization in these
secretory cells has been studied by modifying a glucose-de-
pendent conductance and not with Iapp. Thus we reexamined a
few of these ␤-cell models (Sherman and Rinzel 1992; Sher-
man et al. 1990; Smolen and Keizer 1992) to study the effects
of Iapp and found that all three demonstrate voltage-dependent
frequency control as described in the preceding text. To our
knowledge, the models that we developed here are among the
ﬁrst examples of type I bursting (Bertram et al. 1995a; Rinzel
and Lee 1987) in a neuronal preparation. The appearance of
type-I like bursting behavior has also been reported in trigem-
inal motoneurons (Del Negro et al. 1998).

It is difﬁcult to generalize any principles regarding voltage-
dependent control of burst duration. In some cases, the burst
duration increases with Iapp, such as R15 (Canavier et al. 1991;
Mathieu and Roberge 1971; Wilson 1982) and MMB neurons
(Alonso and Llina´s 1992), whereas in other cases burst dura-
tion decreases (Sherman and Rinzel 1992; Sherman et al. 1990)
or has very little change (Abbott et al. 1991; Epstein and
Marder 1990). Models with similar general mechanisms for
burst initiation and termination (e.g., model 2 of this paper)
(Sherman and Rinzel 1992) yield opposite results with respect
to the voltage-dependent control of burst duration. These re-
sults may depend on the interaction of action potential currents
with subthreshold processes, a dynamically complex process
(de Vries and Miura 1998; Pernarowski et al. 1992; Terman
1991) that warrants further theoretical investigation.

Intrinsic control mechanisms

Neuromodulatory afferent inputs to the pre-Bo¨tC pacemaker
cells that regulate maximum conductances or voltage-depen-
dent parameters of the intrinsic subthreshold currents would
play a major role in burst frequency/duration control (see
discussions in Smith 1997; Smith et al. 1995). Models 1 and 2
offer uniquely different possibilities with respect to the possi-
ble role of subthreshold currents as neuromodulatory targets.
For model 1 g៮
NaP may be viewed as a tunable parameter that
scales the dynamic range of bursting (Figs. 6 and 7). As g៮
NaP
is increased, two effects are observed: the range of values of EL
where bursting is supported is increased and the range of burst
periods possible as EL is varied is increased. The burst duration
is primarily a function of EL and relatively independent of
values of g៮

NaP.

NaP and g៮

KS and/or increasing g៮

Model 2 offers two distinct subthreshold conductances for
controlling the model’s burst dynamics, g៮
KS (Fig. 8).
Decreasing g៮
NaP increases burst duration.
g៮
KS and g៮
NaP have complementary roles with respect to con-
trolling the frequency of bursting: g៮
NaP controls the minimal
value of EL where bursting is supported and the maximum
burst period, whereas g៮
KS controls the maximal value of EL (or
gtonic-e or Iapp) where bursting is supported and the minimal
burst period. Although g៮
KS appears to set an upper bound on
the range of EL values that support bursting, Figure 8B2
illustrates that g៮
KS has a minimal effect on the overall burst
period, which may be considered to be primarily a function of
EL. Thus g៮
KS may serve as a mechanism for varying duty cycle
with minimal effects on the overall burst frequency.

In both models, gL provides a mechanism for controlling
baseline membrane potential and burst frequency. K⫹-domi-
nated conductances that provide a leakage or background cur-
rent in the subthreshold voltage range, including inward recti-
fying K⫹ conductances, have been proposed to play an
important role in control of pre-Bo¨tC pacemaker cell activity
(Smith et al. 1995) as a target for neuromodulation. Our models
show that high gL results in quiescence. As gL is reduced,
bursting occurs at a frequency dependent on the value of gL.
Sufﬁciently low values of gL cause beating. Thus the K⫹-
dominated leak conductance can control the activity mode
(quiescence, bursting, beating) and provide frequency control
in the voltage range for bursting.

Functional states of pacemaker neurons

The model pacemaker neurons have several functional states
as a consequence of the voltage-dependent properties of INaP:
quiescence, oscillatory bursting, and beating. Previously we
have called these pacemaker cells conditional pacemakers to
signify that conditions (appropriate ranges for level of depo-
larization or magnitude of burst-generating conductances) must
exist for oscillatory bursting to occur (Smith et al. 1991, 1995).
As indicated in Figs. 6 and 7 for model 1, the magnitude of
g៮
NaP determines whether the neuron will exhibit oscillatory
bursting: at low values of g៮
NaP the cells only exhibit quiescence
or beating (Fig. 7), but they still (but not necessarily) may be
burst capable so that a self-terminating burst can be triggered
by a brief transient depolarization. As g៮
NaP is increased, the
cells exhibit a voltage regime where intrinsic oscillatory burst-
ing occurs. In our pacemaker cell population models, as ana-
lyzed in detail in the companion paper (Butera et al. 1999), we
presume that there is ordinarily heterogeneity in values of g៮
NaP
and EL within the cell population such that there is a distribu-
tion of cells in the different states; only a fraction of the cells
(when uncoupled) are in the oscillatory bursting mode. With
excitatory synaptic coupling, synchronous oscillatory bursting
occurs and this heterogeneity results in a functionally more
robust oscillator than if the cells were homogeneous (e.g., all in
the oscillatory bursting mode). Because of the inactivation
properties of INaP and synaptic interactions, synchronous os-
cillations can occur in the coupled population even if none (low
INaP) or few of the cells exhibit oscillatory bursting. As dis-
cussed earlier, g៮
NaP and gL are parameters potentially tunable
by neuromodulation. We therefore view the range of behaviors
exhibited by the pacemaker cells as a functional continuum,
and the fraction of cells in the population that are in any state
could be tunable by neuromodulatory afferent inputs.

Summary

The minimal models we have developed provide plausible
mechanisms for generating the multistate, voltage-dependent
behavior observed for the candidate pre-Bo¨tC pacemaker neu-
rons. We conclude that a burst-generating mechanism domi-
nated by the activation-inactivation properties of a single cat-
ionic conductance, postulated to be a persistent Na⫹
conductance, can account for the voltage-dependent bursting
behavior. The dynamics of the burst cycle are controlled prin-
cipally by the kinetics of inactivation and recovery from inac-
tivation of this conductance. Although the actual burst-gener-

396

R. J. BUTERA, J. RINZEL, AND J. C. SMITH

ating current in the pre-Bo¨tC pacemaker neurons remains to be
identiﬁed, our model indicates the essential features that are
required to produce the experimentally observed bursting be-
havior.

putational Neuroscience: Trends in Research, edited by J. Bower. New
York: Plenum Press, 1998b, p. 301–306.

CALABRESE, R. L. AND DESCHUTTER, E. Motor-pattern-generating networks in
invertebrates: modeling our way toward understanding. Trends Neurosci.
15: 439 – 445, 1992.

We thank N. Koshiya, S. Johnson, C. Wilson, and G. de Vries for helpful
discussions and R. Burke and A. Sherman for critical readings of the manu-
script. J. Rinzel thanks the Laboratory of Neural Control, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, for hosting him in the summer of 1998.
This work was supported by the intramural research programs of the

National Institutes of Health.

Present address of R. J. Butera, Jr.: School of Electrical and Computer

Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0250.

Address for reprint requests: J. C. Smith, Laboratory of Neural Control,
NINDS, NIH, Bldg. 49, Room 3A50, 49 Convent Dr., Bethesda, MD 20892-
4455.

Received 23 September 1998; accepted in ﬁnal form 9 February 1999.

REFERENCES

ABBOTT, L. F., MARDER, E., AND HOOPER, S. L. Oscillatory networks: control
of burst duration by electrically coupled neurons. Neural Comp. 3: 487– 497,
1991.

ADAMS, W. B. AND LEVITAN, I. B. Voltage and ion dependencies of the slow
currents which mediate bursting in Aplysia neurone R15. J. Physiol. (Lond.)
360: 69 –93, 1985.

ALONSON, A. AND LLIN´AS, R. R. Electrophyiology of the mammillary complex
in vitro. II. Medial mammillary neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 68: 1321–1331,
1992.

ATWATER, I. AND RINZEL, J. The ␤-cell bursting pattern and intracellular
calcium. In: Ionic Channels in Cells and Model Systems, edited by R.
Latorre. New York: Plenum, 1986, chapt. 22, p. 353–362.

BALIS, U. J., MORRIS, K. F., AND LINDSEY, B. G. Simulations of a ventrolateral
medullary neural network for respiratory rhythmogenesis inferred from
spike train cross-correlation. Biol. Cybern. 70: 311–327, 1994.

BENSON, J. A. AND LEVITAN, I. B. Serotonin increases an anomalous rectifying
K⫹ current in Aplysia neuron R15. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 80: 3522–
3525, 1983.

BERTRAM, R. BUTTE, M. J., KIEMEL, T., AND SHERMAN, A. Topological and
phenomenological classiﬁcation of bursting oscillations. Bull. Math. Biol.
57: 413– 439, 1995a.

BERTRAM, R., SMOLEN, P., SHERMAN, A., MEARS, D., ATWATER, I., MARTIN, F.,
AND SORIA, B. A role for calcium release-activated current (CRAC) in
cholinergic modulation of electrical activity in pancreatic ␤-cells. Biophys.
J. 68: 2323–2332, 1995b.

BOTROS, S. M. AND BRUCE, E. N. Neural network implementation of the
three-phase model of respiratory rhythm generation. Biol. Cybern. 63:
143–153, 1990.

BROWN, A. M., SCHWINDT, P. C., AND CRILL, W. E. Different voltage depen-
dence of transient and persistent Na⫹ currents is compatible with model-
gating hypothesis for sodium channels. J. Neurophysiol. 71: 2562–2565,
1994.

BUTERA, R. J., CLARK, J. W., AND BYRNE, J. H. Transient responses of a
modeled bursting neuron: analysis with equilibrium and averaged nullclines.
Biol. Cybern. 77: 307–322, 1997a.

BUTERA, R. J., CLARK, J. W., CANAVIER, C. C., BAXTER, D. A., AND BYRNE,
J. H. Analysis of the effects of modulatory agents on a modeled bursting
neuron: dynamic interactions between voltage and calcium dependent sys-
tems. J. Comput. Neurosci. 2: 19 – 44, 1995.

BUTERA, R. J., RINZEL, J., AND SMITH, J. C. Models of respiratory rhythm
generation in the pre-B¨otzinger complex. II. Populations of coupled pace-
maker neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 80: 398 – 415, 1999.

BUTERA, R. J., SMITH, J. C., AND RINZEL, J. Rhythm generation and synchro-
nization in a population of bursting neurons with excitatory synaptic cou-
pling: a model for the respiratory oscillator kernel. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 23:
1252, 1997b.

BUTERA, R. J., SMITH, J. C., AND RINZEL, J. Mechanisms for synchronized
bursting of pacemaker neurons in the pre-botzinger complex: computational
models and experimental observations. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 24: 874,
1988a.

BUTERA, R. J., SMITH, J. C., AND RINZEL, J. Novel frequency control in a
population of bursting neurons with excitatory synaptic coupling. In: Com-

CANAVIER, C. C., CLARK, J. W., AND BYRNE, J. H. Simulation of the bursting
activity of neuron R15 in Aplysia: role of ionic currents, calcium balance,
and modulatory transmitters. J. Neurophysiol. 66: 2107–2124, 1991.

CHAY, T. R. AND KEIZER, J. Theory of the effect of extracellular K⫹ on

oscillations in the pancreatic ␤-cell. Biophys. J. 48: 815– 827, 1985.

COHEN, S. D. AND HINDMARSH, A. C. Scientiﬁc programming CVODE, a

stiff/nonstiff ODE solver in C. Comput. Phys. 10: 138 –143, 1996.

DEL NEGRO, C. A., HSIAO, C. F., CHANDLER, S. H., AND GARFINKEL, A.
Evidence for a novel bursting mechanism in rodent trigeminal neurons.
Biophys. J. 75: 174 –182, 1998.

DEMIR, S. S., BUTERA, R. J., DEFRANCESCHI, A. A., CLARK, J. W., AND BYRNE,
J. H. Phase-sensitivity and entrainment in a modeled bursting neuron.
Biophys. J. 72: 579 –594, 1997.

DEVRIES, G. AND MIURA, R. M. Analysis of a class of models of bursting
electrical activity in pancreatic ␤-cells. SIAM J. Appl. Math. 58: 607– 635,
1998.

DRUMMOND, A. H., BENSON, J. A., AND LEVITAN, I. B. Serotonin-induced
hyperpolarization of an identiﬁed Aplysia neuron is mediated by cyclic
AMP. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 77: 5013–5017, 1980.

DUFFIN, J. A model of respiratory rhythm generation. Neuroreport 2: 623– 626,

1991.

EPSTEIN, I. R. AND MARDER, E. Multiple modes of a conditional neuronal

oscillator. Biol. Cybern. 63: 25–34, 1990.

FELDMAN, J. L. AND SMITH, J. C. Cellular mechanisms underlying modulation
of breathing patterns in mammals. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 563: 114 –130, 1989.
FLEIDERVISH, I. A., FRIEDMAN, A., AND GUTNICK, M. J. Slow inactivation of
Na⫹ current and slow cumulative spike adaptation in mouse and guinea-pig
neocortical neurones in slices. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 493: 83–97, 1996.

FLEIDERVISH, I. A. AND GUTNICK, M. J. Kinetics of slow inactivation of
persistent sodium current in layer V neurons of mouse neocortical slices.
J. Neurophysiol. 76: 2125–2129, 1996.

FRANCESCHETTI, S., GUATTEO, E., PANZICA, F., SANCINI, G., WANKE, E., AND
AVANZINI, G. Ionic mechanisms underlying burst ﬁring in pyramidal neu-
rons: intracellular study in rat sensorimotor cortex. Brain Res. 696: 127–139,
1995.

FRENCH, C. R., SAH, P., BUCKETT, K., AND GAGE, P. W. A voltage-dependent
persistent sodium current in mammalian hippocampal neurons. J. Gen.
Physiol. 95: 1139 –1157, 1990.

FUNK, G., SMITH, J. C., AND FELDMAN, J. L. Generation and transmission of
respiratory oscillations in medullary slices: role of excitatory amino acids.
J. Neurophysiol. 70: 1497–1515, 1993.

FUNK, G. D., SMITH, J. C., AND FELDMAN, J. L. Development of thyrotropin-
releasing hormone and norepinephrine potentiation of inspiratory-related
hypoglossal motoneuron discharge in neonatal and juvenile mice in vitro.
J. Neurophysiol. 72: 2538 –2541, 1994.

GOLA, M. Neurones ´a ondes-salves des mollusques. Pﬂ¨ugers Arch. 352: 17–36,

1974.

GOTTSCHALK, A., OGILVIE, M. D., RICHTER, D. W., AND PACK, A. I. Compu-
tational aspects of the respiratory central pattern generator. Neural Comp. 6:
56 – 68, 1994.

HOEHN, K., WATSON, T. W., AND MACVICAR, B. A. A novel tetrodotoxin
insensitive slow sodium current in striated and hippocampal neurons. Neu-
ron 10: 543–552, 1993.

HOPKINS, W. F., SATIN, L. S., AND COOK, D. S. Inactivation kinetics and
pharmacology distinguish two calcium currents in mouse pancreatic ␤-cells.
J. Membr. Biol. 119: 229 –239, 1991.

JACK, J.J.B., NOBEL, D., AND TSIEN, R. W. Electric Current Flow in Excitable

Cells. London: Oxford, 1975.

JOHNSON, S. M., SMITH, J. C., FUNK, G. D., AND FELDMAN, J. L. Pacemaker
behavior of respiratory neurons in medullary slices from neonatal rat.
J. Neurophysiol. 72: 2598 –2608, 1994.

KEIZER, J. AND SMOLEN, P. Bursting electrical activity in pancreatic ␤ cells
caused by Ca2⫹- and voltage-inactivated Ca2⫹ channels. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA 88: 3897–3901, 1991.

KOSHIYA, N. AND SMITH, J. C. Real-time visualization of respiratory pacemaker
neuron activity with calcium-sensitive dyes in the pre-B¨otziner complex in
vitro. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 24: 531, 1998.

KOSHIYA, N. AND SMITH, J. C. Neuronal pacemaker for breathing visualized in

vitro. Nature. In press.

RESPIRATORY PACEMAKER NEURONS

397

KRAMER, R. H. AND ZUCKER, R. S. Calcium-dependent inward current in
Aplysia bursting pacemaker neurones. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 362: 107–130,
1985.

KRINSKII, V. I. AND KOKOZ, Y. M. Analysis of equations of excitable mem-
branes. I. Reduction of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations to a second-order
system. Bioﬁzika 18: 506 –511, 1973.

LI, Y.-X., BERTRAM, R., AND RINZEL, J. Modeling N-methyl-D-aspartate-in-

duced bursting in dopamine neurons. Neuroscience 71: 397– 410, 1996.

LI, Z. AND HATTON, G. I. Oscillatory bursting of phasically ﬁring rat supraoptic
neurones in low-Ca2⫹ medium: Na⫹ inﬂux, cytosolic Ca2⫹ and gap junc-
tions. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 496: 379 –394, 1996.

LLIN´AS, R. R. The intrinsic electrophysiological properties of mammalian
neurons: insights into central nervous system function. Science 242: 1654 –
1664, 1988.

L¨UTHI, A. AND MCCORMICK, D. A. H-current: properties of a neuronal and

network pacemaker. Neuron 21: 9 –12, 1998.

MATHIEU, P. A. AND ROBERGE, F. A. Characteristics of pacemaker oscillations

in Aplysia neurons. Can. J. Pharmacol. Physiol. 49: 787–795, 1971.

MCCORMICK, D. AND HUGUENNARD, J. A model of the electrophysiological
properties of thalamocortical relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 68: 1384 –
1400, 1992.

NADIM, F. AND CALABRESE, R. A slow outward current activated by FMRF-
amide in heart interneurons of the medicinal leech. J. Neurosci. 17: 4461–
4472, 1997.

OGILVIE, M. D., GOTTSCHALK, A., ANDERS, K., RICHTER, D. W., AND PACK,
A. I. A network model of respiratory rhythmogenesis. Am. J. Physiol. 263
(Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 32): R962–R975, 1992.

OKA, Y. Characterization of TTX-resistant Na2⫹ current underlying pacemaker
potentials of ﬁsh gonadotropin- releasing (GnRH) neurons. J. Neurophysiol.
75: 2397–2404, 1996.

ONIMARU, H., BALLANYI, K., AND RICHTER, D. W. Calcium-dependent re-
sponses in neurons of the isolated respiratory network of newborn rats.
J. Physiol. (Lond.) 491: 677– 695, 1996.

PARTRIDGE, L. D. AND SWANDULLA, D. Calcium-activated non-speciﬁc cationic

channels. Trend Neurosci. 11: 69 –72, 1988.

PERNAROWSKI, M., MIURA, R. M., AND KEVORKIAN, J. Perturbation techniques
for models of bursting electrical activity in pancreatic ␤-cells. SIAM J. Appl.
Math. 52: 1627–1650, 1992.

RAMIREZ, J.-M., QUELLMALZ, U. J. A., AND RICHTER, D. W. Postnatal changes
in the mammalian respiratory network as revealed by the transverse brain-
stem slice of mouse. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 491: 799 – 812, 1996.

RAMIREZ, J.-M. AND RICHTER, D. W. The neuronal mechanisms of respiratory

rhythm generation. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 6: 817– 825, 1996.

REKLING, J. C. AND FELDMAN, J. L. Preb¨otzinger complex and pacemaker
neurons: hypothesized site and kernel for respiratory rhythm generation.
Annu. Rev. Physiol. 60: 385– 405, 1998.

RICHTER, D. W. Neural regulation of respiration: Rhythmogenesis and afferent
control. In: Comprehensive Human Physiology, edited by R. Gregor and U.
Windhorst. Heidelberg: Springer, 1996, vol. 2, p. 2079 –2095.

RICHTER, D. W., BALLANYI, K., AND SCHWARZACHER, S. Mechanisms of
respiratory rhythm generation. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2: 788 –793, 1992.
RINZEL, J. Excitation dynamics: insights from simpliﬁed membrane models.

Fed. Proc. 44: 2944 –2946, 1985.

RINZEL, J. A formal classiﬁcation of bursting mechanisms in excitable sys-
tems. In: Mathematical Topics in Population Biology, Morphogenesis, and
Neurosciences, edited by E. Teramoto and M. Yamaguti. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag, 1987, vol. 71 of Lecture Notes in Biomathematics, p. 267–281.

RINZEL, J. AND LEE, Y. S. Dissection of a model for neuronal parabolic

bursting. J. Math. Biol. 25: 653– 675, 1987.

RYBAK, I. A., PATON, J.F.R., AND SCHWABER, J. S. Modeling neural mecha-
nisms for genesis of respiratory rhythm and pattern. II. Network models of
the central respiratory pattern generator. J. Neurophysiol. 77: 2007–2026,
1997.

SHAO, Y. M. AND FELDMAN, J. L. Respiratory rhythm generation and synaptic
inhibition of expiratory neurons in pre-b¨otzinger complex: differential roles
of glycinergic and GABAergic neural transmission. J. Neurophysiol. 77:
1853–1860, 1997.

SHARP, A. A., O’NEIL, M. B., ABBOTT, L. F., AND MARDER, E. Dynamic clamp:
computer-generated conductances in real neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 69:
992–995, 1993.

SHERMAN, A., KEIZER, J., AND RINZEL, J. Domain model for Ca2⫹ inactivation
of Ca2⫹ channels at low channel density. Biophys. J. 58: 985–995, 1990.
SHERMAN, A. AND RINZEL, J. Rhythmogenic effects of weak electronic cou-
pling in neuronal models. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 89: 2471–2474, 1992.
SMITH, J. C. Integration of cellular and network mechanisms in mammalian
oscillatory motor circuits: Insights from the respiratory oscillator. In:
Neurons, Networks, and Motor Behavior, edited by P. Stein, S. Grillner,
A. I. Selverston, and D. G. Stuart. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997, p.
97–104.

SMITH, J. C., BALLANYI, K., AND RICHTER, D. W. Whole-cell patch-clamp
recordings from respiratory neurons in neonatal rat brainstem in vitro.
Neurosci. Lett. 134: 153–156, 1992.

SMITH, J. C., ELLENBERGER, H. H., BALLANYI, K., RICHTER, D. W., AND
FELDMAN, J. L. Pre-B¨otzinger complex: a brainstem region that may gen-
erate respiratory rhythm in mammals. Science 254: 726 –729, 1991.

SMITH, J. C., FUNK, G. D., JOHNSON, S. M., AND FELDMAN, J. L. Cellular and
synaptic mechanisms generating respiratory rhythm: insights from in vitro
and computational studies. In: Ventral Brainstem Mechanisms and Control
of Respiration and Blood Pressure, edited by O. Trouth, R. Millis, H.
Kiwull-Schone, and M. Schlafke. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1995, p.
463– 496.

SMOLEN, P. AND KEIZER, J. Slow voltage inactivation of Ca2⫹ currents and
bursting mechanisms for the mouse pancreatic beta-cell. J. Membr. Biol.
127: 9 –19, 1992.

STAFSTROM, C. E., SCHWINDT, P. C., AND CRILL, W. E. Negative slope con-
ductance due to a persistent subthreshold sodium current in cat neocortical
neurons in vitro. Brain Res. 236: 221–226, 1982.

SWANDULLA, D. AND LUX, H. D. Activation of a nonspeciﬁc cationic conduc-
tance by intracellular calcium elevation in bursting pacemaker neurons of
Helix pomata. J. Neurophysiol. 54: 1430 –1443, 1985.

TERMAN, D. Chaotic spikes arising from a model of bursting in excitable

membranes. SIAM J. Appl. Math. 51: 1418 –1450, 1991.

WILSON, W. A. Patterned bursting discharge of invertebrate neurons. In:
Cellular Pacemakers, edited by D. O. Carpenter. New York: J. Wiley, 1982,
vol. 1, chapt. 7, p. 219 –235.

