Simulation Study of Cellular Electric Properties

in Heart Failure

Leo Priebe, Dirk J. Beuckelmann

Abstract—Patients with severe heart failure are at high risk of sudden cardiac death. In the majority of these patients,
sudden cardiac death is thought to be due to ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Alterations of the electric properties of single
myocytes in heart failure may favor the occurrence of ventricular arrhythmias in these patients by inducing early or
delayed afterdepolarizations. Mathematical models of the cellular action potential and its underlying ionic currents could
help to elucidate possible arrhythmogenic mechanisms on a cellular level. In the present study, selected ionic currents
based on human data are incorporated into a model of the ventricular action potential for the purpose of studying the
cellular electrophysiological consequences of heart failure. Ionic currents that are not yet sufficiently characterized in
human ventricular myocytes are adopted from the action potential model developed by Luo and Rudy (LR model). The
main results obtained from this model are as follows: The action potential in ventricular myocytes from failing hearts
is longer than in nonfailing control hearts. The major underlying mechanisms for this prolongation are the enhanced
activity of the Na⫹-Ca2⫹ exchanger, the slowed diastolic decay of the [Ca2⫹]i transient, and the reduction of the inwardly
rectifying K⫹ current and the Na⫹-K⫹ pump current in myocytes of failing hearts. Furthermore, the fast and slow
components of the delayed rectifier K⫹ current (IKr and IKs, respectively) are of utmost importance in determining
repolarization of the human ventricular action potential. In contrast, the influence of the transient outward K⫹ current
on APD is only small in both cell groups. Inhibition of IKr promotes the development of early afterdepolarizations in
failing, but not nonfailing, myocytes. Furthermore, spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum triggers
a premature action potential only in failing myocytes. This model of the ventricular action potential and its alterations
in heart failure is intended to serve as a tool for investigating the effects of therapeutic interventions on the electric
excitability of the human ventricular myocardium. (Circ Res. 1998;82:1206-1223.)

Key Words: action potential 䡲 computer model 䡲 arrhythmia 䡲 heart failure

Patients with severe heart failure are at high risk of sudden

cardiac death. More than 50% of these patients die
suddenly.1 In the majority of these patients, sudden cardiac
death is thought to be due to ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
The mechanisms underlying these lethal arrhythmias are
largely unknown. However, in animal models of heart failure
and in humans, there is evidence that reentry as well as
nonreentrant mechanisms may play a role.2– 4 Triggered ac-
tivity arising from EADs or DADs and abnormal automaticity
are possible cellular mechanisms underlying nonreentrant
arrhythmias.5– 8 In animal studies, Ca2⫹ influx through volt-
age-gated ICa was demonstrated to cause EADs.9,10 Cation
influx through Ins(Ca) or Na⫹ influx via the electrogenic INaCa
was found to underlie DADs.11,12 However, it is unknown
what influence these currents may have on triggered activity
in human ventricular myocardium. In recent years, quantita-
tive studies of ionic currents in human ventricular cells have
greatly enlarged our knowledge about the characteristics of
the human AP in patients with and without heart failure.13–25
In some of these studies, great variations in shape and
duration of the APs have been found. Nevertheless, an

unequivocal result was that the AP is prolonged in human
ventricular myocytes isolated from patients with heart failure
compared with control subjects. Various ionic currents have
13,19
been shown to be altered in heart failure. IK1
have been found to be reduced by some groups, although this
finding was not undisputed. Wettwer et al14 have found no
significant alterations in current densities and kinetics of Ito in
failing compared with nonfailing myocytes. Current densities
and kinetics of ICa, however, have been shown to be unaltered
by most groups.15,16,18

13,22 and Ito

A prominent feature of the single myocyte of the failing
heart is an alteration of [Ca2⫹]i handling26,27 and an enhanced
activity of the Na⫹-Ca2⫹ exchanger.28,29 It has been postulated
that these abnormalities may give rise to arrhythmias in heart
failure, but proof for this hypothesis remains lacking. Math-
ematical models of the cellular AP and its underlying ionic
currents may help to elucidate possible arrhythmogenic
mechanisms on a cellular level. For this purpose, a model of
the ventricular AP based on Hodgkin-Huxley formalisms30
was developed. Selected depolarizing and repolarizing ionic
currents and the [Ca2⫹]i handling incorporated into this model

Received January 5, 1998; accepted April 6, 1998.
From the Department of Medicine III, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Correspondence to Dirk J. Beuckelmann, MD, University of Cologne, Department of Medicine III, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str.9, D-50924 Cologne,

Germany. E-mail Dirk.Beuckelmann@uni-koeln.de

© 1998 American Heart Association, Inc.

Downloaded from 

 by guest on June 29, 2015

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

1206

Priebe and Beuckelmann

June 15, 1998

1207

Selected Abbreviations and Acronyms

[A] ⫽ maximum concentration of [A]
AP ⫽ action potential

APD ⫽ action potential duration
APD25, APD50, APD90 ⫽ APD at 25%, 50%, and

90% repolarization

CICR ⫽ Ca2⫹-induced Ca2⫹ release
DAD ⫽ delayed afterdepolarization
EAD ⫽ early afterdepolarization
gmax ⫽ maximal conductance
ICa ⫽ L-type Ca2⫹ current
ICa,b ⫽ Ca2⫹ background current

IK ⫽ delayed rectifier K⫹ current
IK1 ⫽ inward rectifier K⫹ current

IKr, IKs ⫽ rapid and slow component of IK

IKtail ⫽ K⫹ tail current
INa ⫽ fast Na⫹ current
INa,b ⫽ Na⫹ background current
INaCa ⫽ Na⫹-Ca2⫹ exchanger current
INaK ⫽ Na⫹-K⫹ pump current
Ins(Ca) ⫽ Ca2⫹-dependent nonspecific cation current

Ist ⫽ stimulus current
Ito ⫽ transient outward K⫹ current

JSR ⫽ junctional sarcoplasmic reticulum

k ⫽ slope factor

Kleak ⫽ rate of Ca2⫹ leakage out of NSR
Km,i ⫽ half-saturation concentration of channel i
kNaCa ⫽ scaling factor of INaCa
LR ⫽ Luo-Rudy

NSR ⫽ network sarcoplasmic reticulum

SR ⫽ sarcoplasmic reticulum
V0.5 ⫽ 50% activation voltage

were based on quantitative measurements in single ventricu-
lar myocytes isolated from nonfailing and terminally failing
human hearts.

Using this model, we evaluated which ionic currents may
affect the AP in human myocardium and which cellular
abnormalities in human ventricular myocytes from failing
hearts may contribute to arrhythmogenesis in heart failure.

Materials and Methods

A variety of ionic currents and electrogenic ion pumps and exchang-
ers that have been described in animals have not been sufficiently
characterized in human ventricular myocytes. Therefore, these cur-
rents have to be calculated by equations used in an AP model
developed for guinea pig ventricular myocytes by Luo and Rudy31
(LR model). However, the major ionic currents, ICa, Ito, IK with its two
components (IKr and IKs), and IK1, are based on human data. In
addition, the [Ca2⫹]i transients in human myocytes and their alter-
ations in failing myocytes observed experimentally27 can be simu-
lated by this model. The other currents included into the model, INa,
INaCa, and INaK, have to be adopted from the LR model and modulated
in such a way that simulations are widely consistent with available
human data.

Voltage-clamp data for ICa, Ito, and IK1 and Ca2⫹ measurements are
as described in our previous studies.13,16,19,20,27 Experiments were
carried out at 37°C. (See References 13, 16, 19, 20, and 27 for a
detailed description of the experimental conditions.)

Under space-clamp conditions, the differential equation describing
the time-dependent changes in membrane potential (V) is as follows:

dV/dt⫽⫺共1/C m)(INa⫹ICa⫹Ito⫹IKr⫹IKs⫹IK1⫹INaCa

⫹INaK⫹INa,b⫹ICa,b⫹Ist)

Figure 1. Steady-state activation (⽧) and inactivation (F) of
simulated Ito at indicated voltages. Computed curves are a
Boltzmann ﬁt to the data according the following equation:
I/Imax⫽Imax/{1⫹exp[(v⫺V0.5)/k]}, where I indicates current, and v is
the membrane potential.

where Cm is the membrane capacitance and Ist is an externally applied
stimulus current. The ionic currents IX are calculated by ionic gates
using Hodgkin-Huxley–type formalisms.30 All ionic currents are
computed for 1 pF of cell membrane capacitance.

The complete set of equations of all ionic currents, ionic ex-
changer currents, and [Ca2⫹]i handling is provided in the Appendix.

Fast Naⴙ Current: INa
INa is calculated using equations of the LR model.31 Sakakibara et al25
have demonstrated that the characteristics of INa in isolated human
ventricular myocytes are similar to those of other mammalian species
and that INa kinetics are identical in several different disease states.
Therefore, we use the same equations for INa in both cell groups.

L-Type Ca2ⴙ Current: ICa
The kinetics of ICa have been shown to be unaltered in myocytes from
failing hearts.15,16,18 Therefore, for calculating ICa the same gating
parameters are used in both groups. In animal and human studies, it
has been clearly demonstrated that the inactivation of ICa is voltage
dependent. In addition, there is experimental evidence indicating that
inactivation of ICa is also Ca2⫹ dependent.32,33 This type of regulation
of ICa seems also to exist in human ventricular myocytes.17 Conse-
quently, we integrate a proportional factor, fCa, in the equation of ICa
is formulated as follows: fCa⫽[1⫹([Ca2⫹]i/600 nmol/L)]⫺1.
that
is performed with simulated [Ca2⫹]i
Fitting of experimental ICa
transients formulated as follows: A 䡠 [exp(⫺t/␶1)⫺exp(⫺t/␶2)]⫹R. A
is a proportional factor, ␶1 and ␶2 are time constants, and R is the
basal Ca2⫹ level. By this approach, the important Ca2⫹-dependent
inactivation of ICa may be sufficiently incorporated into this model as
the simulations of ICa indicate.

Transient Outward Kⴙ Current: Ito
No significant alterations of the kinetics of Ito have been found in
failing compared with control myocytes.14 Therefore,
the same
gating parameters for simulating Ito are used in both groups. On the
basis of experimental data,20 the current density of Ito is assumed to
be 64% of the value measured in nonfailing myocytes. The steady-
state activation and inactivation curves of Ito obtained from fitting the
experimental voltage clamp traces are shown in Figure 1.

Data are fitted by a Boltzmann distribution. The parameters V0.5
and k of the Boltzmann equation in the model are compared with
those from experimental voltage-clamp studies (Table 1). The
differences are negligible and can be explained by the different
solutions used in the experiments to block interfering currents.

Delayed Rectifier Kⴙ Current: IK
The existence of two components of the delayed rectifier, a rapidly
activating component (IKr) and a slowly activating component (IKs),

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

1208

Cellular Electric Properties in Heart Failure

TABLE 1. Parameters of Steady-State Activation and
Inactivation of Ito (Experimental Data and Model)

Steady-State Activation

Steady-State Inactivation

Studies

V0.5, mV
⫹9.2⫾1.8 ⫺13.0⫾0.6

k, mV

⫺34.1⫾2.0 ⫹4.5⫾0.2
Wettwer et al14
Na¨ bauer et al19 ⫹16.7⫾1.6 ⫺8.4⫾0.43 ⫺34.5⫾2.3 ⫹5.5⫾0.5
Model

⫺34.4

⫹16.7

⫺8.4

⫹5.6

V0.5, mV

k, mV

has been documented by Li et al.21 On the basis of their data, both
currents are incorporated into the model. The method for simulating
IKr in human ventricular myocytes is the same as that used by
Sanguinetti and Jurkiewicz34 in guinea pig myocytes. For simplifi-
cation, the slow inactivation of IKr during depolarization at ⫹50 mV
observed experimentally (Li et al21) is not considered. Quantitative
values of IKs are calculated by fitting the experimental voltage-clamp
traces recorded in the study of Li et al to a single exponential
function. On depolarization, the activation of IKs in human ventric-
ular myocytes follows a sigmoidal time course, as has been reported
in guinea pig ventricular myocytes.34 This strong sigmoidal activa-
tion has also been found in wild-type IKs.35 Therefore, the second
power of activation in the Hodgkin-Huxley formalism of IKs is used
to obtain an adequate fit to the measured traces. In animal studies, IKs
has been shown to be sensitive to intracellular Ca2⫹ 36,37, and IKr has
been shown to be sensitive to extracellular K⫹.37 In the only study
investigating IKs and IKr in human ventricular myocytes (ie, that of Li
et al21), experiments were performed only with 5.0 mmol/L EGTA in
the pipette solution and with one extracellular K⫹ concentration.
Thus, it is unclear whether this type of regulation found in animal
ventricular myocytes also exists in human ventricular myocytes.
Consequently, we do not consider such a regulation of IKs and IKr in
our model. At the present time, the properties of IKr and IKs in heart
failure are unknown. Therefore, we assume that IKs and IKr are
unchanged in heart failure.

Inward Rectifier Kⴙ Current: IK1
The simulated current density of IK1 is assumed to be reduced by 25%
at ⫺70 mV in the failing myocyte compared with control myocytes
on the basis of results of experimental studies.13,22 Since the time-
inactivation of IK1 can be observed only at voltages
dependent
negative to ⫺110 mV,22 IK1 is assumed to be time independent. As in
animal ventricular myocytes, IK1 is also almost solely carried by K⫹
ions in human ventricular myocytes.22 Therefore, the reversal poten-
tial of IK1 is calculated by Nernst’s equation for K⫹.

Naⴙ-Ca2ⴙ Exchanger Current: INaCa
INaCa is integrated into the model using values from the LR model
because data in human ventricular myocytes are not available at
present. To compute INaCa in a nonfailing myocyte, only kNaCa is
changed to 50% of the value used in the LR model, taking into
account the smaller activity of INaCa in human myocytes compared
with different animal species.38 With such a value of kNaCa, INaCa
simulated in a nonfailing myocyte with a protocol similar to that in
experiments by Sham et al38 is in the range of the experimental data
(model, 0.50 pA/pF; experiment, 0.54⫾0.1 pA/pF). In a failing
myocyte, we assume 65% greater INaCa than in a nonfailing myocyte.
This assumption is based on the observation of an increase of
Na⫹-Ca2⫹ exchanger activity in myocardium from patients with heart
failure.28

Naⴙ-Kⴙ Pump Current: INaK
For simulation of INaK, we use the equation of the LR model. The
magnitude of INaK has been chosen in a way such that APD in a
nonfailing myocyte at a stimulation frequency of 1 Hz is in the range
measured experimentally in single human myocytes from nonfailing
heart by our group (unpublished data) and by Peeters et al.39 There is
a report suggesting that the concentration of the Na⫹,K⫹-ATPase is

decreased by 42% in failing hearts.40 This alteration is assumed to
represent a proportional decrease in INaK. Therefore, a 42% reduction
in INaK of a failing myocyte is incorporated into the model.

[Ca2ⴙ]i Transient
To simulate the [Ca2⫹]i transients in both groups, the approach of the
LR model has been chosen.31 In some equations for calculating the
Ca2⫹ homeostasis, the parameters are changed in a way such that
simulated [Ca2⫹]i
transients closely resemble those measured in
nonfailing and failing human ventricular myocytes.27 The differences
in simulations of the intracellular Ca2⫹ fluxes to the LR model are
described below. For more details, see Reference 31.

CICR by the SR
The threshold for CICR from the cardiac SR is reduced from 0.18 to
0.005 ␮mol/L because of the smaller size of the peak ICa in human
compared with animal myocytes. The time constants for the activa-
tion and deactivation of the release process is set to 4 ms. Experi-
mental studies have revealed that the function and number of the
ryanodine channels are widely unaltered in heart failure.41,42 There-
fore, the CICR mechanism is assumed to be equal in nonfailing and
failing myocytes.

Ca2ⴙ Buffers in the Myoplasm and the SR
There are reports that the affinity of troponin C to Ca2⫹ is unaltered
in heart failure.43 Consequently, because of the great contribution of
troponin C to the total myoplasmic Ca2⫹ buffer capacity, we have
used equal myoplasmic buffer concentrations in nonfailing and
failing myocytes. For simulating the Ca2⫹ buffering in the JSR
(calsequestrin), we adopted the values of the LR model for our
model. There is no evidence of differences in the level of calseques-
trin in heart failure.44 Therefore, equal concentrations of calseques-
trin have been used in both cell groups. With the approach of
Hilgemann and Noble,45 we compute the steady-state buffering
process numerically by using Newton’s iterative method.

Ca2ⴙ Uptake and Leakage by the NSR
Reduction of the activity of Ca2⫹-ATPase of the SR in heart failure,
as shown in experimental studies,46,47 is integrated into the model. To
obtain the characteristic Ca2⫹ transients in both cell groups, the
scaling factor for Ca2⫹ uptake, I¯
up, is set to 0.0045 mmol/(L 䡠 ms) in
a nonfailing and 0.0015 mmol/(L 䡠 ms) in failing myocytes. The Kleak
value in both cell groups was chosen in way such that Ca2⫹ leakage
out of the NSR is equal to the Ca2⫹ uptake in the NSR at basal [Ca2⫹]i
(nonfailing, Kleak⫽0.00026 ms⫺1; failing, Kleak⫽0.00017 ms⫺1).
Sarcolemmal Ca2ⴙ Pump
The contribution of the sarcolemmal Ca2⫹ pump to the extrusion of
Ca2⫹ out of the cell has been shown to be very small.48 Therefore, we
do not consider this pump in our model.

Background Currents
A linear Ca2⫹ background current, ICa,b, is incorporated into the
model for balancing the Ca2⫹ extrusion through INaCa at resting
potential in both cell groups. By this mechanism, the resting level of
[Ca2⫹]i is maintained at 0.12 ␮mol/L in a nonfailing myocyte and at
0.15 ␮mol/L in a failing myocyte.

A linear Na⫹ background current, INa,b, is also incorporated into the
model of a nonfailing myocyte for maintaining the resting level of
[Na⫹]i (10 mmol/L in both cell groups). In a failing myocyte, Na⫹ ion
extrusion by INaK balances the Na⫹ ion entry by INaCa so that
incorporation of INa,b into this model is not necessary in that cell.

The model is written in Pascal and tested using a Turbo-Pascal
compiler (Borland International) on an IBM-compatible computer
with an Intel Pentium central processing unit. A fourth-order
Runge-Kutta method with fixed time intervals is used for numerical
integration of differential equations.

For the simulations in the present study, the fixed time interval for
voltage-clamp simulations is 0.01 to 0.1 ms. The time interval for AP
simulations is held at 0.0001 ms during the stimulus current and then
set at 0.01 to 0.1 ms. APs are elicited in all simulations with 10

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

Priebe and Beuckelmann

June 15, 1998

1209

Figure 2. Ca2⫹ current through ICa and intracellular [Ca2⫹] transients ([Ca2⫹]i) of a nonfailing myocyte at various depolarizations in the
model and in the experiment27 (insets). Holding potential was ⫺40 mV. As in the experimental study, INaCa was present in these simula-
tions. [Na⫹]i was 5 mmol/L.

pA/pF of Ist for 0.7 ms. Standard software is used to convert the
simulated data in ASCII format and to prepare the figures. Fitting of
the voltage-clamp traces is performed with a commercial software
using a nonlinear least-squares algorithm.

Results

Simulations of Voltage-Clamp Experiments
An important test for the validity of an AP model is the
accurate simulation of voltage-clamp experiments. Therefore,
we have simulated the ionic currents ICa, Ito, IKr, IKs, and IK1
under voltage-clamp conditions using pulse protocols similar
to those used in the experiments previously performed by our
group13,27 and by Li et al.21 Figures 2 and 3 show ICa and
[Ca2⫹]i
transients in a nonfailing and a failing myocyte,
respectively. Experimental data are shown as insets. Simula-
tions of [Ca2⫹]i transients at various depolarizations were
started with [Ca2⫹]NSR⫽[Ca2⫹]JSR⫽2.5 mmol/L in a nonfailing
myocyte and [Ca2⫹]NSR⫽[Ca2⫹]JSR⫽1.0 mmol/L in a failing
myocyte on the basis of experimental data.49 Under these
conditions, simulated and experimentally found ICa and
[Ca2⫹]i transients were similar in both cell groups. In partic-
ular, peak [Ca2⫹]i was maximal when ICa reached its maxi-
mum at ⫹10 mV in both cell groups. Values of resting and
peak [Ca2⫹]i (Table 2) at ⫹10 mV are in the range of

experimental data.27 Although peak ICa was slightly greater in
a failing than in a nonfailing myocyte, the triggered [Ca2⫹]i
transient was smaller than in a nonfailing myocyte because of
the lower Ca2⫹ content of the SR.

Figure 4 shows Ito simulated in a failing myocyte. The
corresponding experimental traces are depicted in Figure 4B.
The pulse protocol is shown as an inset. The current density of
Ito at ⫹40 mV (difference between peak current and maintained
current at the end of the pulse) was 8.9 pA/pF. The time course
of inactivation of Ito was largely independent of voltage. The
time constant of its monoexponential decay in the voltage range
of ⫹10 to ⫹80 mV was 13⫾0.9 ms. These values of Ito are in
accordance with experimental data measured at 37°C.20 Figures
2, 3, and 4 demonstrate that simulated ICa, [Ca2⫹]i transients, and
Ito resemble the experimental recordings closely with regard to
their magnitude and kinetics.

The simulations of voltage-clamp experiments of IKr and IKs
are depicted in Figure 5. Depolarizations from a holding
potential of ⫺60 mV to the various clamp pulse potentials
generate a rapidly activating (Figure 5A) and a slowly
activating (Figure 5B) K⫹ current through delayed rectifier
channels with close approximation to experimental data.21 To
validate simulations of IKr and IKs, current-voltage relations
for IKtail of IKr and IKs are shown in Figure 5C. The values are

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

1210

Cellular Electric Properties in Heart Failure

Figure 3. Ca2⫹ current through L-type Ca2⫹ channels (ICa) and intracellular [Ca2⫹] transients ([Ca2⫹]i) of a failing myocyte at various
depolarizations in the model and in the experiment27 (insets). Holding potential was ⫺40 mV. As in the experimental study, INaCa was
present in these simulations. [Na⫹]i was 5 mmol/L.

very close to experimental data.21 Activation voltage depen-
dence was determined by normalizing IKtail at each test
potential in Figure 5C to the current at the most positive
potential. Results are shown in Figure 5D. Curves are fitted to
a Boltzmann distribution function. V0.5 and k values are
consistent with experimental results (Table 3).

Data of IK1 are shown in Figure 6. Experimental traces of
IK1 in failing myocytes are depicted in Figure 6A. Currents
were elicited from a holding potential of ⫺30 mV to the
indicated voltages. On the basis of these experimental data,
IK1 was simulated using the same pulse protocol. The current-
voltage relations of simulated IK1 in a nonfailing and a failing
myocyte are shown in Figure 6B. The whole-cell current
slope conductance at the reversal potential of IK1 in a failing
myocyte is smaller (0.23 nS/pF) than that in a nonfailing
myocyte (0.4 nS/pF). In addition, the current density of IK1 at
⫺70 mV (0.6 pA/pF [failing myocyte] versus 0.8 pA/pF
[nonfailing myocyte]) and at ⫺100 mV (⫺10 pA/pF [failing
myocyte] versus ⫺15 pA/pF [nonfailing myocyte]) is as-
sumed to be smaller in a failing than in a nonfailing myocyte.

nonfailing and of a failing myocyte were simulated. To obtain
a steady state in [Ca2⫹]i transients, 10 APs were elicited at a
frequency of 1 Hz. Under these conditions, both APs are
distinctly different (Figure 7, top; nonfailing, dashed line;
failing, solid line).

APD90 was significantly longer in a failing than in a
nonfailing myocyte (548.8 versus 374.0 ms, respectively). In
contrast to this, differences in APD25 and APD50 between both
cell groups were smaller (APD25: nonfailing, 262.9 ms;
failing, 305.7 ms; APD50: nonfailing, 310.2 ms; failing, 374.5
ms). Therefore, the prolongation of APD in heart failure was
mainly due to the slower rate of repolarization in the late
phase of AP in a failing compared with a nonfailing myocyte,
which was also found in an experimental study on human
myocardium.50 The ionic currents and the [Ca2⫹]i transients

TABLE 2.

[Ca2ⴙ]i Regulation (Experimental Data and Model)

Nonfailing

Failing

Resting,
nmol/L
96⫾47

120

Peak,
nmol/L
746⫾249

614

Resting,
nmol/L
165⫾61

136

Peak,
nmol/L
367⫾109

334

Simulated AP Is Prolonged in Heart Failure
After showing that simulated ionic currents and [Ca2⫹]i
transients resemble experimental measurements, APs of a

Beuckelmann et al27
Model

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

Priebe and Beuckelmann

June 15, 1998

1211

Figure 4. Ito of a failing myocyte in the model (A) and in the experiment (B). The pulse protocol is shown as an inset.

during the AP are shown in Figures 7 and 8 (nonfailing,
dashed line; failing, solid line). At 4 mmol/L [K⫹]o and
140 mmol/L [K⫹]i, the resting membrane potential in this
model was only slightly different in both cell groups (non-
failing, ⫺89.7 mV; failing, ⫺85.6 mV). A greater discrep-
ancy in resting membrane potential between both cell groups
was prevented by IK1. Although the current density of IK1 was
reduced in a failing compared with a nonfailing myocyte, the
increase of IK1 in these cells when the resting potential
becomes more positive limits the depolarization of the cell
membrane in a failing myocyte (Figure 7, IK1).

After depolarization of the cell membrane by a suprath-
reshold stimulus, INa depolarized the membrane to an over-
shoot potential of 50 mV and inactivated immediately (not
shown). Subsequently, ICa, Ito, IKs, and IKr were activated, and
INaK increased. The fast activation of ICa (5 ms) was followed
by a rapid incomplete inactivation to 12% of its peak value
(Figure 7). Repolarization was initiated by the activation of
Ito. In both cell groups, Ito activated and inactivated rapidly
(Figure 7). Thereafter, IKr and, subsequently, IKs were com-
pletely activated and accelerated the repolarization, which
was completed by the opening of IK1 channels (Figure 7).

Figure 5. A and B, Simulation of the fast
(IKr, A) and the slow (IKs, B) component of
IK based on the study by Li et al.21 Time-
dependent step currents were elicited by
depolarizations ove r 3 s to theindicated
potentials from a holding potential of
⫺60 mV. Tail currents were elicited by
repolarizations to ⫺30 mV over 2 s. Note
the reduction of step current density of
IKr at voltages negative to 0 mV. C, Cur-
rent-voltage relations for IKtail of IKr ((cid:131))
and IKs (F). IKtail was elicited by the same
pulse protocol as described above. D,
Activation curve of IKr and IKs based on
analysis of IKtail in panel C.

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

1212

Cellular Electric Properties in Heart Failure

TABLE 3. Parameters of Steady-State Activation of IKr and IKs
(Experimental Data and Model)

IKs

IKr

Studies

Li et al21
Model

V0.5, mV
⫹9.4⫾2.5

⫹10.6

k, mV

⫹11.8⫾2.9

⫹11.5

V0.5, mV
⫺14⫾4
⫺18.9

k, mV

⫹7.7⫾2.7

⫹6.1

When these repolarizing currents increased, ICa deactivated
completely. During the plateau and repolarization phase of
AP, INaK counteracted the depolarization of the cell membrane
(Figure 8).

The total current of the background currents, ICa,b and INa,b,
during an AP was slightly higher in a nonfailing myocyte
(Figure 8), so that the alterations in APD in heart failure may
even be underestimated.

In this model, INaCa was a repolarizing current during most
of the AP plateau in a failing myocyte (Figure 7). During the
late plateau and repolarization phase, INaCa carried an inward
current in its forward mode and extruded Ca2⫹ ions out of the
myocyte. By this means, INaCa becomes a depolarizing current.
Therefore, it slows down the rate of membrane repolarization
during the late phase of membrane repolarization, especially

Figure 7. Simulated APs and major ionic currents determining
the AP shape in a nonfailing myocyte (dashed line) and in a fail-
ing myocyte (solid line). For details, see text. Peak values of ICa
and of Ito in a failing myocyte are indicated by arrows.

in a failing myocyte, because of its higher activity and the
slowed decay of the [Ca2⫹]i transient. In this myocyte, the
final repolarization phase was also prolonged because of the
decrease of IK1 (0.68 versus 0.85 pA/pF in a nonfailing
myocyte) and of INaK.

The [Ca2⫹]i transient during the AP was markedly different
in both cell groups (Figure 8). As a result of the higher Ca2⫹
content in the SR, the maximum of the Ca2⫹ transient was
higher in a nonfailing than in a failing myocyte (nonfailing,
1100 nmol/L; failing, 569 nmol/L). The faster inactivation of
in the nonfailing myocyte was caused by enhanced
ICa
Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation of this current and led, together
with higher Ito and INaK, to a reduction of the plateau phase of
the AP in this myocyte compared with a failing myocyte
(nonfailing, ⫹19.0 mV; failing, ⫹29.2 mV).

In conclusion, these simulations of APs in both groups
demonstrate that the prolongation of the AP in a failing
myocyte is mainly due to a prolonged late repolarization
phase caused by an enhanced activity of INaCa and the slowed
diastolic decay of the [Ca2⫹]i transient. The reduction of IK1

Figure 6. Inward rectiﬁer current: IK1. A, Original experimental
recording from a holding potential of ⫺30 mV. The cell was
hyperpolarized to ⫺120 to ⫹ 10 mV over 500 ms. Note that the
current was time dependent only on hyperpolarizations to
potentials negative to ⫺100 mV. B, Current-voltage relations of
simulated IK1 in a nonfailing and a failing myocyte. Currents are
simulated using the experimental pulse protocol as described
above.

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

Priebe and Beuckelmann

June 15, 1998

1213

isolation procedures and recording APs under maintained
conditions, a significant variability remains. APs measured in
our laboratory (Dr M. Lindner, unpublished data) vary more
distinctly in failing than in nonfailing myocytes. Figure 9
shows measured APs that represent the observed spectrum. It
is obvious that simulated APs (Figure 7) were generally
similar to the measured APs in nonfailing (Figure 9A) and
failing (Figures 9B and 9C) myocytes. However, a group of
recorded APs in failing myocytes (Figure 9D) characterized
by a pronounced prolonged plateau phase showed significant
differences to the simulation. Possible underlying factors will
be discussed later.

Simulated and Experimental APD Restitution
Curves Are Similar
In the human heart, similar to other mammalian hearts,
increasing the pacing rate or shortening of the coupling
interval of a premature beat
leads to shortening of the
APD.51,52 The reconstruction of this physiological phenome-
non by this model serves a very important purpose,
ie,
validation. Therefore, APD restitution was simulated accord-
ing to the experimental protocol of Morgan et al.51 For this
purpose, paired stimuli were used to elicit a second AP (AP2)
at variable times after the initiation of the first (AP1). Before
each simulation with a different time interval, 10 APs were
elicited at a frequency of 1 Hz to obtain a steady state in
[Ca2⫹]i transients. For clarity, only APs at the following
extrastimulus intervals are shown: 300, 400, 500, 600, 700,
and 800 ms (Figure 10A). APD restitution curves are depicted
in Figure 10B.

APD90 of the second AP obtained in simulations (Figure
10B, circle) and in the experiment (Figure 10B, square) are
plotted as function of extrastimulus interval. The similarity of
both curves substantiates the validity of this model.

The Effect of Ito on the APD in Human
Myocardium Is Small
4-Aminopyridine is known to prolong the AP. From this
result, it has been postulated that reduction of Ito may prolong
the AP in cardiac myocytes.13,53,54 However, there are addi-
tional effects of 4-aminopyridine on other currents, especially

Figure 9. Measured APs in nonfailing (A)
and failing (B to D) myocytes (M. Lindner,
unpublished data). Note the great variability
in shape and duration of APs in failing
myocytes.

Figure 8. Simulations of the intracellular [Ca2⫹] transient ([Ca2⫹]i)
in a nonfailing myocyte (dashed line) and in a failing myocyte
(solid line) at a stimulation frequency of 1.0 Hz. In addition, INaK,
ICa,b, and INa,b are shown.

and INaK in heart failure additionally contribute to the differ-
ence in the late repolarization phase between nonfailing and
failing myocytes.

Simulated APs Resemble Those Recorded in
Human Ventricular Myocytes
APs in human ventricular myocytes of nonfailing and failing
hearts measured in different laboratories show a great vari-
ability in duration and shape. Despite using comparable

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

1214

Cellular Electric Properties in Heart Failure

Figure 10. Restitution of APD. Simulations were performed in a
nonfailing myocyte. A, The myocyte was initially paced 10 times
at 1 Hz, and then an additional stimulus was applied, triggering
a second AP (AP2) after variable intervals (IDs), deﬁned as the
time interval between the initiation of the last paced AP (AP1)
and the upstroke of AP2. AP1 and AP2 are shown for 6 different
IDs: 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, and 800 ms. B, APD90 as function
of ID is shown. Results of simulations (F) and experimental data
(f) by Morgan et al51 are compared.

23 and IK.55 With our model, we can investigate the
on ICa
possible contribution of Ito to the APD in human ventricular
myocytes. To assess the effect of Ito on APD, we simulated
the APs in both cell groups under conditions of various
degrees of Ito inhibition (25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%). As
described above, the simulations were preceded by 10 stim-
ulations to obtain steady-state conditions. The simulated APs
shown in Figure 11 demonstrate that inhibition of Ito does not
significantly prolong the AP in a nonfailing (Figure 11A) or
in a failing (Figure 11B) myocyte.

IKr and IKs Control Repolarization in
Human Myocardium
Despite their relative small current densities, IKr and IKs
largely control repolarization of the AP in human ventricular
myocytes. This effect of IKr and IKs on APD in guinea pig
ventricular myocytes has already been demonstrated in a
previous computer simulation study.56 Inhibition of IKr, the
main mechanism of class III antiarrhythmic agents, has also
been shown to prolong the AP in in vivo mapping studies.57–59
Carlsson et al60 have found a pronounced prolongation of
the AP in nonfailing human ventricular muscles after inhibi-
tion of IKr by 10⫺6 H 234/09 (almokalant). At this concentra-
tion, almokalant significantly blocks only IKr.61

We attempted to imitate this effect of IKr on APD in human
myocardium by varying gmax of IKr to 75%, 50%, 25%, and 0%
of its original value. To obtain a steady state of the [Ca2⫹]i
transient, 20 action potentials were elicited. Figure 12A
shows the prolongation of the AP in a nonfailing cell by
inhibition of IKr to various degrees (left). As in the experi-
mental study,60
increased inhibition of IKr resulted in a
progressive prolongation of AP. At 100% inhibition of IKr,
APD90 was lengthened from 374.0 to 689.4 ms, which is in
the range measured by Carlsson at al.60 This APD prolonga-

Figure 11. Effect of inhibition of Ito on the APD. APs were simu-
lated at various degrees of inhibition of Ito in a nonfailing myocyte
(A) and in a failing myocyte (B). These simulations imply that Ito has
only a small effect on the APD in human myocardium.

tion was, however, larger than that found in single human
myocytes after 100% inhibition of IKr by Li et al.21 This
discrepancy may be partially due to the different experimen-
tal conditions. In contrast to our simulations, the intracellular
Ca2⫹ was buffered by using 5 mmol/L EGTA, significantly
influencing ICa and, thereby, the AP. Inhibition of IKr also
prolonged AP in a failing myocyte (Figure 12B, left). In
contrast
to a nonfailing myocyte, 50% inhibition of IKr
resulted in an incomplete repolarization of the cell membrane
in a failing myocyte at 1.0 Hz (Figure 12B, left; 50%). At
75% inhibition of IKr, even an EAD developed after 3
stimulations. Therefore, a failing myocyte is more sensitive
than a nonfailing myocyte to IKr inhibition. Simulations with
various degrees of inhibition of IKs have indicated that this
current also has a significant impact on APD in both cell
groups (Figure 12A and 12B, right). However, inhibition of
IKr had an even greater effect. In a nonfailing myocyte, 100%
inhibition of IKs prolonged APD90 from 374.0 to 526.1 ms. In
a failing myocyte,
incomplete repolarization occurred at
100% inhibition of IKs.

Complete Inhibition of IKr Induces Development of
Recurrent EADs in Failing Myocytes
The previous simulations reveal the critical role of IKr in
repolarization and, thereby, in the electric stability of the cell
membrane in a failing myocyte. Therefore, inhibition of IKr
may facilitate the formation of EADs in failing myocytes. At
75% inhibition of IKr, we can observe an EAD after 3
stimulations. To investigate whether there are recurrent EADs
in a failing myocyte without preconditioning stimulations,

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

Priebe and Beuckelmann

June 15, 1998

1215

Figure 12. Simulated APs under control conditions (dashed line) and when gmax of IKr or IKs was reduced by 25%, 50%, 75%, or 100%
in a nonfailing myocyte (A) and in a failing myocyte (B).

simulation of the action potential in a failing myocytes was
performed while assuming complete inhibition of IKr. The
computed AP, [Ca2⫹]i transient, and ICa and INaCa are shown in
Figure 13. It is obvious that 100% inhibition of IKr leads to
recurrent EADs in a failing myocyte. IKr inhibition prolonged
the time when the membrane potential was at ⬇⫺30 mV.
This allowed for sufficient time for reactivation of ICa and for
generation of EADs. During the decay phase of EADs, INaCa
transiently becomes a depolarizing current. However, the
magnitude of INaCa (⫺0.05 pA/pF) was much smaller than that
of ICa (⫺0.5 pA/pF). Therefore, it can be concluded that
EADs are mainly carried by ICa in our model.

The Likelihood of Premature APs Is Enhanced in
a Failing Myocyte
Premature APs can be triggered by DADs, which are caused
by a spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR.62,63 Since INaCa as
a possible underlying current is enhanced in failing myocytes,
it can be expected that premature APs occur more frequently
in these myocytes than in nonfailing cells. However, there is
evidence that the Ca2⫹ content of SR is decreased in failing
myocytes, which would lead to a smaller Ca2⫹ increase after
spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR and, thereby, to a
reduced driving force for the depolarizing INaCa in these cells.

it should pointed out

Therefore, it remains unclear whether increased INaCa in
failing myocytes is indeed combined with a higher occur-
rence of DADs. Additionally,
that
DADs are not, per se, arrhythmogenic. One could rather
imagine that the generation of DADs would result in reduced
excitability of the myocyte by affecting the availability of
Na⫹ channels. The generation of DADs exerts a solely
proarrhythmogenic effect if the depolarization reaches the
threshold to open Na⫹ channels and trigger a premature AP.
Consequently, we investigated whether the combined elec-
trophysiological alterations in heart failure would enhance the
likelihood of premature APs. For this purpose, a spontaneous
Ca2⫹ release from the SR was simulated in both cell groups.
As Luo and Rudy64 have shown, the recovery from the slow
inactivation of Na⫹ channels, named factor j in their model,
determines the recovery of the excitability after the AP. To
investigate the influence of INaCa on the generation of prema-
ture APs separately, the Na⫹ channels should be completely
recovered from their slow inactivation at the start of the
spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR. Therefore, a sponta-
neous Ca2⫹ release from SR was assumed to occur at least 250
ms after 90% repolarization of the last AP in both cell groups.
After this diastolic time interval, the factor j⫽1 (eg, the
availability of Na⫹ channels) was ⬇100% in both cell groups.

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

1216

Cellular Electric Properties in Heart Failure

Figure 13. Generation of recurrent EADs in a failing myocyte
after complete inhibition of IKr. V indicates membrane potential.

We assumed an equal Ca2⫹-independent mechanism of the
spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR in both cell groups.
Simulations of spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR were
preceded by a train of stimulations at 2.0 Hz for elevating the
Ca2⫹ content of the SR. After 11 stimulations, there were
differences in Ca2⫹ homeostasis between both cell groups
(Figures 14 and 15). Before spontaneous Ca2⫹ release oc-
curred, diastolic [Ca2⫹]i was higher in a failing myocyte (275
nmol/L) than in a nonfailing myocyte (218 nmol/L). [Ca2⫹]NSR
was increased from 2.9 to 3.4 mmol/L in a nonfailing
myocyte and from 1.2 to 1.5 mmol/L in a failing myocyte. As
expected, the postulated spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the
SR resulted in a greater increase of [Ca2⫹]i in a nonfailing
myocyte (1394 nmol/L) than in a failing myocyte (713
nmol/L).

As a result, depolarizing peak INaCa was greater in a
nonfailing than in a failing myocyte (⫺1.35 versus ⫺1.0
pA/pF, respectively), although the activity of the Na⫹-Ca2⫹
exchanger was elevated in the failing myocyte. However, a
premature AP was generated only in a failing myocyte
(Figure 15).

Discussion

General Findings
Results of simulations of ionic currents and of the APD
restitution show that this model can reproduce important
electrophysiological characteristics of human ventricular
myocytes. Voltage-clamp simulations of the major ionic
currents (Figures 2 to 6) and the simulation of AP (Figure 7)

Figure 14. Effect of spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR in a
nonfailing myocyte. V indicates membrane potential. To
enhanced Ca2⫹ content concentration of the NSR and JSR
([Ca2⫹]NSR and [Ca2⫹]JSR), 11 APs were elicited at a frequency of
2.0 Hz. Spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR was assumed to
happen 250 ms after the last AP (indicated by an arrow). Subse-
quently, [Ca2⫹]i increased quickly to a maximum level of 1394
nmol/L and then declined. This is linked to the generation of a
DAD through a depolarizing INaCa.

closely resemble experimental data obtained from human
single myocytes. Simulations of the ionic currents during the
time course of the action potential (Figures 7 and 8) and
simulations of ionic current inhibition reveal the important
role of IKr and IKs in repolarization in human ventricular
myocytes. INaK may additionally contribute to repolarization
in human ventricular myocytes and, together with IK1, stabi-
lize the resting potential (Figure 8). Furthermore, simulations
of ionic currents during the AP demonstrate that INaCa is an
important depolarizing current during the late phase of
repolarization in a failing myocyte (Figure 7) because of the
enhanced activity of the Na⫹-Ca2⫹ exchanger and the slow
decay of the [Ca2⫹]i
in this cell (Figure 8). In
contrast to the results from an AP model of guinea pig
ventricular myocytes,56 we have found that the influence of IKr
on APD is greater than that of IKs. This discrepancy is due to
a much smaller ratio of gmax of IKs to IKr in the present study
(1.3) compared with the animal model (7.72). Our value is

transient

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

Priebe and Beuckelmann

June 15, 1998

1217

In studies of various animal models of heart failure or
hypertrophy, a reduction of Ito has been found, and this has
been assumed to be an important factor causing AP prolon-
gation in heart failure.54,66,67 In human ventricular myocytes,
inhibition of Ito has been found to prolong AP.13 Our simula-
tions of different degrees of inhibition of Ito (Figure 10)
suggest, however, that inhibition of Ito does not prolong AP in
nonfailing or failing myocytes in human hearts. A reason for
this discrepancy could be that 4-aminopyridine, which was
used in the experimental study,13 also blocked IKs and IKr,
which would lengthen the AP. Considering this problem in
experimental conditions, we conclude from the simulations of
our model that the influence of Ito on APD is negligible in
human myocardium. Of course, this model cannot prove that
Ito does not alter APD, but it strongly suggests that reduction
of the current density of Ito found in failing myocytes of
human hearts does not seem to contribute significantly to the
APD prolongation in heart failure. This hypothesis should be
tested experimentally using a highly specific blocker of Ito in
the future. In a human atrial AP model, it has been demon-
strated that the effect of Ito on the AP is largely dependent on
the magnitude of IK.68

Therefore, the distinctly different influence of Ito on APD
in human ventricular myocytes compared with other cell
types and species may be caused mainly by the specific
kinetics and magnitude of IKr and IKs found in human
ventricular myocytes. In myocytes, where IK is found to be
small, Ito may significantly determine the repolarization phase
of the AP.69

Prolongation of the AP in human ventricular myocytes of
failing hearts has been well established.13,22,24,26 Most authors
have found the APD to range between 400 and 1260 ms. In
most of these studies, intracellular Ca2⫹ was buffered using
EGTA in the pipette solution. Therefore, the influence of INaCa
on the prolongation of the AP can be only slight in these
studies. Our simulations suggest that an APD of ⬎600 ms can
be explained only by assuming a significant reduction of IKr
or IKs (Figure 12). In those studies in which APD was very
long, the authors could indeed detect only a small IKr and no
IKs.13,24 As in nonfailing myocytes, the variability in shape and
duration of APs in failing myocytes measured in our labora-
tory and in others could possibly be explained by a variable
expression of IKr and IKs (Figure 9B to 9D). Further studies are
necessary to show whether alterations of IKr and IKs in failing
myocytes reflect real current changes in heart failure or
whether they are caused by the isolation procedure.

Conclusions From the Simulated APs for
Arrhythmogenesis in Heart Failure
From the results shown in Figures 14 and 15, we conclude
that in heart failure one important mechanism for triggered
arrhythmias could be DADs. In our model, DADs were
initiated by a postulated spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the
SR. The resulting [Ca2⫹]i increase depolarized the cell mem-
brane through INaCa in both cell groups. Therefore, as in
animal myocytes, this indicates that INaCa may also signifi-
cantly contribute to the generation of DADs in human
myocytes.

Figure 15. Effect of spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR in a
failing myocyte. V indicates membrane potential. As in a nonfail-
ing myocyte, 11 APs were elicited at a frequency of 2.0 Hz to
enhanced Ca2⫹ content concentration of NSR and JSR
([Ca2⫹]NSR and [Ca2⫹]JSR). However, the increase was smaller
compared with a nonfailing myocyte. Spontaneous Ca2⫹ release
from the SR was assumed to happen 250 ms after the last AP
(indicated by an arrow). In contrast to a nonfailing myocyte,
[Ca2⫹]i increased only to a maximum level of 713 nmol/L. This
results, however, in a premature AP.

validated by simulations of current-voltage relations of tail
currents of IKr and IKs, which are very close approximations to
experimental data (Figure 5C). Although the gmax of IKs is still
greater than that of IKr in the present study, IKs contributes a
smaller fraction of the total IK during a ventricular AP
because of its slow activation kinetics (Figure 5B).

The influence of IKr and IKs on APD may be one reason for
the wide range of measured APDs in different publications
(between 233 ms17 and 650 ms13 in single myocytes from
nonfailing hearts). Yue et al65 have demonstrated that the
expression of IK in cells isolated from the canine heart is very
dependent on the isolation technique.

Among other factors, different expressions of IKr and IKs in
single human myocytes, possibly due to different isolation
procedures, could be a reason for this divergence of APD.
However, the AP simulated in a nonfailing myocyte (Figure
7) in our model very closely resembles the AP measured in
single cells by our work group (Figure 9A) and by Peeters et
al.39 When the monophasic AP technique was used in in vivo
studies,51,52 the observed shape and duration of AP in human
hearts were very similar to our simulations.

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

1218

Cellular Electric Properties in Heart Failure

Although the activity of the Na⫹-Ca2⫹ exchanger is en-
hanced in failing myocytes, INaCa is slightly larger in nonfail-
ing than in failing myocytes, since the [Ca2⫹]i increase is
much higher in this cell. Nevertheless, a premature AP can be
triggered only in a failing myocyte as the repolarizing ionic
currents, IK1 and INaK, are reduced in this cell. This indicates
that a reduction of repolarizing currents (IK1 and INaK) rather
than an increase of the depolarizing current (INaCa) seems to be
responsible for the enhanced likelihood of triggered APs in
failing myocytes. In our model, the increase of the Na⫹-Ca2⫹
exchanger activity in a failing myocyte can only partially
compensate the smaller [Ca2⫹]i increase as a driving force
after spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR. It should be
pointed out that the conclusion of these simulations is limited
by the assumption that the spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the
SR is self-initiated and equal
in both cell groups. This
limitation is necessary because our understanding of the
mechanisms involved in the spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from
the SR is incomplete. At present, the mechanism of the
spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from the SR is thought to be a Ca2⫹
overload of the cell.70,71 Since the Ca2⫹ content of the SR
increases faster in a nonfailing than in a failing myocyte at 2.0
Hz (Figures 14 and 15), the spontaneous Ca2⫹ release from
the SR after pacing burst and resulting DADs is expected to
occur earlier and more frequently in a nonfailing than in a
failing myocyte, assuming that spontaneous Ca2⫹ release
occurs if the Ca2⫹ content of the SR reaches a threshold level.
This is, however, in contrast to experimental animal studies in
which DADs and triggered APs were observed more fre-
quently in failing or hypertrophied animal myocytes.72,73 The
development of this model
is inadequate to resolve this
discrepancy. It cannot predict the occurrence of spontaneous
Ca2⫹ release from the SR in both cell groups. Nevertheless, it
may help to elucidate whether there are differences in the
induction of DAD-triggered APs between both cell groups.
Indeed, the simulations clearly show that spontaneous Ca2⫹
release leads to a triggered AP only in a failing myocyte.
From these triggered APs, triggered arrhythmias may arise.
Even if we assume a higher incidence of spontaneous Ca2⫹
the higher
release from the SR in nonfailing myocytes,
incidence of resulting DADs would not result in a higher
incidence of triggered arrhythmias than in failing myocytes.
in DADs and
triggered APs does not mean that the Ca2⫹-dependent non-
specific cation channel has no role in the arrhythmogenesis in
heart failure. In animal studies, there is evidence for its
contribution in generating DADs.74,75 Luo and Rudy76 con-
cluded from the results of their simulations that the contribu-
tion of Ins(Ca) and INaCa to the induction of DADs depends on
the level of Ca2⫹ overload. However, at present, the existence
of a nonspecific cation channel in human ventricular myo-
cardium is unknown.

The conclusion about

the role of INaCa

EADs are triggered during the plateau phase of an AP and
are thought to be caused by reactivation of the ICa.6,7 The
membrane potential has to remain at voltages positive to ⫺35
mV until the L-type Ca2⫹ channels are able to recover from
their inactivation and can open again. Detailed models have
been developed addressing this issue. Nordin and Ming77
showed that current-induced EADs in guinea pig ventricular

myocytes are mainly due to the L-type Ca2⫹ channel window
current. Zeng and Rudy78 came to the same conclusion in their
model simulating the effect of cesium, Bay K 8644, and
isoproterenol on the AP. In various preparations, specific
block of IKr has been found to result in EADs in nonfailing
animal myocytes. However, EADs are not generated by
inhibition of IKr block in a nonfailing myocyte in this model
(Figure 12A, left). Even if the gmax of IKr and IKs is changed
simultaneously, corresponding to the approach of Zeng et al56
to generate EADs in their model, no EADs can be generated
in a nonfailing myocyte (not shown). In contrast to this, 75%
inhibition of IKr can lead to an EAD in a failing myocyte
(Figure 12B, left; 75%). When the inhibition of IKr is 100%,
even recurrent EADs develop in this myocyte (Figure 13).

As already demonstrated in previous models,77,78 reacti-
vated ICa is also the underling inward current of these EADs.
In conclusion, our results indicate that EADs are difficult to
induce in human compared with animal myocytes. They can
be generated only in failing myocytes after blocking IKr by at
least 75% (Figure 12B, left, and Figure 13). This discrepancy
in EAD formations between animal models and the present
model is supported by experimental data. Vermeulen et al73
have observed that EADs occur only in papillary muscles of
rabbit hearts but never in human papillary muscles. Further
studies are required to assess the role of EADs in arrhythmias
in human ventricular myocytes.

Besides triggered APs, reentry mechanisms may also
contribute to the increased incidence of tachyarrhythmias in
heart failure.79 Among many promoting factors, dispersion of
refractoriness or wide variations in the duration of APs
observed in hypertrophied myocardium80 can evoke reentry
arrhythmias.81 Our model can also contribute to the investi-
gation of this type of arrhythmia in heart failure by identify-
ing the ionic currents that are important for the APD in human
ventricular myocytes. The simulations demonstrate that IKs
has an impact on AP in the human heart. Regional differences
of IKs reported in canine left ventricle82 could partially explain
the known heterogeneity of the AP in human left ventricle.83
This may also hold true to an increased extent in heart failure.
In addition, the increase of INaCa activity and the alterations of
[Ca2⫹]i handling may also not be uniform in heart failure,
thereby increasing the inhomogeneity of the AP across the
heart wall. Another factor determining dispersion of APs
along the myocardial wall could be the passive electrical
properties of the myocardium. Keung et al84 have demon-
strated that these are different in normal and hypertrophied rat
myocardium. Further studies are necessary to determine
whether it also holds true in the human heart.

Limitations of the Model
A variety of models have been developed previously on the
basis of the results of animal studies.31,56,85– 88 Since major
differences exist
in the characteristics of ionic currents
between human and animal myocytes, conclusions drawn
from these models cannot easily be extrapolated to human
heart cells. However, although the present model has the
advantage of being based partially on human data, it also has
several limitations.

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

Significant uncertainty remains concerning the magnitude
of INaCa. At present, voltage-clamp data of this current in
human ventricular myocytes are not available. Comparison of
INaCa incorporated in the model with the measured data in the
human atrium suggests that the magnitude of the simulated
INaCa has been well estimated. Nevertheless, it should be
pointed out that some results have to be interpreted with
caution because of their dependence on INaCa. However, the
simulations clarify that an increase of INaCa could play an
important role in the arrhythmogenesis in heart failure and
that
its quantification in human ventricular myocytes is
desirable.

To simulate [Ca2⫹]i transients, the approach of the LR
model is used. Although major components of intracellular
Ca2⫹ homeostasis are included in this model, this approach is
only an approximation of the complex nature of the intracel-
lular Ca2⫹ homeostasis, since some important features, such
as the CICR from the SR or the mechanism of Ca2⫹ buffering,
and their potential changes in heart failure are simplified.
This is mainly due to our incomplete understanding of the
exact mechanisms involved in these phenomena. Neverthe-
less, the simulated [Ca2⫹]i transients in both cell groups agree
largely with experimental observations and provide an inde-
pendent test of how well our model describes [Ca2⫹]i ho-
meostasis.

Another assumption of the model

that has not been
investigated is that IKr and IKs are unaltered in heart failure. In
addition, information about IKr dependence on [K⫹]o and IKs
dependence on [Ca2⫹]i is not available at present.

Therefore, it should be stressed that further development of
this model is needed for simulating alterations of the APs
under various pathophysiological conditions, such as myo-
cardial ischemia, as performed by Shaw and Rudy.89 Never-
theless, the conclusions from the simulations presented here,
and also their limitations, highlight several important areas
that deserve future experimental studies.

Appendix: Formulations of Ionic Currents

Inward Current
Fast Naⴙ Current: INa
INa⫽16 䡠 m3 䡠 h 䡠 j 䡠 (V⫺ENa)
ENa⫽(RT/F) 䡠 ln共[Na⫹] o / [Na⫹]i兲
where m, h, and j are the activation gate, the fast inactivation gate,
and the slow inactivation gate of INa, respectively, V is the membrane
potential, ENa is the equilibrium potential for Na⫹, R is the universal
gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, and F is the
Faraday constant.
For Vⱖ⫺40 mV
␣h⫽␣j⫽0.0
␤h⫽1/共0.13 䡠 {1⫹exp[(V⫹10.66)/⫺11.1]}兲
␤j⫽0.3 䡠 exp(⫺2.535 䡠 10⫺7 䡠 V)/{1⫹exp[⫺0.1 䡠 (V⫹32)]}
For V⬍⫺40 mV
␣h⫽0.135 䡠 exp[(80⫹V)/⫺6.8]
␤h⫽3.56 䡠 exp(0.079 䡠 V)⫹3.1 䡠 105 䡠 exp(0.35 䡠 V)

Priebe and Beuckelmann

June 15, 1998

1219

␣j⫽[⫺1.2714 䡠 105 䡠 exp(0.244 䡠 V)⫺3.474 䡠 10⫺5
䡠 exp(⫺0.04391 䡠 V)] 䡠 (V⫹37.78)/{1⫹exp[0.311 䡠 (V⫹79.23)]}

␤j⫽0.1212 䡠 exp(⫺0.01052 䡠 V)/{1⫹exp[⫺0.1378 䡠 (V⫹40.14)]}

For the total range of V
␣m⫽0.32 䡠 (V⫹47.13)/{1⫺exp[⫺0.1 䡠 (V⫹47.13)]}
␤m⫽0.08 䡠 exp(⫺V/11)

Slow Inward Current: ICa
ICa⫽gCa,max 䡠 d 䡠 f 䡠 fCa 䡠 (V⫺ECa)
gCa,max⫽0.064 mS/␮F
ECa⫽(RT/ 2F) 䡠 ln([Ca2⫹]o /[Ca2⫹]i)
␣d⫽14.98/(16.68 䡠 冑2 䡠 ␲ )exp{⫺[(V⫺22.36)/16.68]2/ 2}
␤d⫽0.1471⫺5.3/(14.93 䡠 冑2 䡠 ␲)exp{⫺[(V⫺6.27)/14.93]2/2}
␣f⫽[6.87 䡠 10⫺3]/{1⫹exp[(6.1546⫺V)/⫺6.12]}
␤f⫽{0.069 䡠 exp[⫺0.11 䡠 (V⫹9.825)]⫹0.011}/
{1⫹exp[⫺0.278 䡠 (V⫹9.825)]}⫺5.75 䡠 10⫺4
fCa⫽1/(1⫹([Ca2⫹]i/KCa))
KCa⫽600 nmol/L
where gCa,max is gmax for ICa, d is the activation gate of ICa, f is the
inactivation gate of ICa, ECa is the equilibrium potential for Ca2⫹, fCa
is a proportional factor for Ca2⫹-dependent inactivation of ICa, and
KCa is half-maximum Ca2⫹ binding concentration for ICa.

Outward Current
Transient Outward Current: Ito
Ito⫽gto,max 䡠 r 䡠 t 䡠 (V⫺Eto)
Eto⫽(RT/F) 䡠 ln{(0.043 䡠 [Na⫹]o⫹[K⫹]o)/(0.043 䡠 [Na⫹]i⫹[K⫹]i)}
gto,max: nonfailingf0.3 mS/␮F; heart failuref0.191 mS/␮F
␣r⫽{0.5266 䡠 exp[⫺0.0166 䡠 (V⫺42.2912)]}/
{1⫹exp[⫺0.0943 䡠 (V⫺42.2912)]}

␤r⫽{0.5149 䡠 exp[⫺0.1344 䡠 (V⫺5.0027)]⫹5.186 䡠 10⫺5 䡠 V}/
{1⫹exp[⫺0.1348 䡠 (V⫺5.186 䡠 10⫺5)]}

␣t⫽{0.0721 䡠 exp[⫺0.173 䡠 (V⫹34.2531)]⫹5.612 䡠 10⫺5 䡠 V}/
{1⫹exp[⫺0.1732 䡠 (V⫹34.2531)]}

␤t⫽{0.0767 䡠 exp[⫺1.66 䡠 10⫺9 䡠 (V⫹34.0235)]⫹1.215 䡠 10⫺4 䡠 V}/
{1⫹exp[⫺0.1604 䡠 (V⫹34.0235)]}

where gto,max is gmax for Ito, r and t are the activation gate and the
inactivation gate of Ito, respectively, and Eto is the equilibrium
potential for Ito.

Delayed Rectifier Current

2 䡠 (V⫺EK)

Slowly Activating Current: IKs
IKs⫽gKs,max 䡠 Xs
EKs⫽(RT/F) 䡠 ln{(0.01833 䡠 [Na⫹]o⫹[K⫹]o)/(0.01833 䡠 [Na⫹]i⫹[K⫹]i)}
gKs,max⫽0.02 mS/␮F

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

1220

Cellular Electric Properties in Heart Failure

␣Xs

␤Xs

⫽3.0 䡠 10⫺3/{1⫹exp[(7.44⫺(V⫹10)/14.32]}

⫽5.87 䡠 10⫺3/{1⫹exp[(⫺5.95⫺(V⫹10)/⫺15.82]}

where gKs,max is gmax for IKs, Xs is the activation gate of IKs, and EKs is
the equilibrium potential for IKs.

Rapidly Activating Current: IKr
IKr⫽gKr,max 䡠 Xr 䡠 rik 䡠 (V⫺EK)
EK⫽(RT/F) 䡠 ln([K⫹]o /[K⫹]i)
gKr, max⫽0.015 mS/␮F
␣Xr⫽{0.005 䡠 exp[5.266 䡠 10⫺4 䡠 (V⫹4.067)]}/
{1⫹exp[⫺0.1262 䡠 (V⫹4.067)]}

␤Xr⫽{0.016 䡠 exp[1.6 䡠 10⫺3 䡠 (V⫹65.66)]}/
{1⫹exp[0.0783 䡠 (V⫹65.66)]}

rik⫽1/{1⫹exp[(V⫹26)/ 23]}

where gKr,max is gmax for IKr, Xr is the activation gate of IKr, rik is the
inward-rectification factor of IKr, and EK is the equilibrium potential
for IK.

Inward Rectifier Current: IK1
IK1⫽gK1, max 䡠 K1⬁ 䡠 (V⫺EK1)
EK1⫽(RT/F) 䡠 ln([K⫹]o/[K⫹]i)
gK1, max: nonfailingf2.5 mS/␮F; heart failuref2.0 mS/␮F
␣K1⫽0.1/{1⫹exp[0.06 䡠 (V⫺EK1⫺200)]}
␤K1⫽{3 䡠 exp[2 䡠 10⫺4 䡠 (V⫺EK1⫹100)]⫹exp[0.1 䡠 (V⫺EK1⫺10)]}/
{1⫹exp[⫺0.5 䡠 (V⫺EK1)]}
K1⬁⫽␣K1/(␣K1⫹␤K1)
where gK1,max is gmax for IK1, K1⬁ is the inactivation gate of IK1, and EK1
is the equilibrium potential for IK1.

Background Currents
Ca2ⴙ Background Current: ICa,b
ICa,b⫽GCa,b 䡠 (V⫺ECa,b)
GCa,b: nonfailingf0.00085 mS/␮F; heart failuref0.0013 mS/␮F
ECa,b⫽ECa
where GCa,b is gmax for ICa,b, and ECa,b is the equilibrium potential for
ICa,b.
Naⴙ Background Current: INa,b
INa,b⫽GNa,b 䡠 (V⫺ENa,b)
GNa,b: nonfailingf0.001 mS/␮F; heart failuref0 mS/␮F
ENa,b⫽ENa
where GNa,b is gmax for INa,b, and ENa,b is the equilibrium potential for
INa,b.

Pump and Exchanger
Naⴙ-Kⴙ Pump: INaK
INaK⫽INaK 䡠 fNaK 䡠 1/(1⫹(Km,Nai/[Na⫹]i)1.5) 䡠 [[K⫹]o /([K⫹]o⫹Km,Ko)]
INaK: nonfailingf1.3 pA/pF; heart failuref0.75 pA/pF

fNaK⫽1/[1⫹0.1245 䡠 exp(⫺0.1 䡠 V 䡠 F/RT)
⫹0.0365 䡠␴ 䡠 exp(⫺V 䡠 F/RT)]

␴⫽1/7 䡠 {exp([Na⫹]o /67.3)⫺1}

Km,Nai

⫽10 mmol/L

⫽1.5 mmol/L

Km,Ko
where fNaK is the voltage-dependence parameter of INaK, and ␴ is the
[Na⫹]o-dependence factor of INaK.

m,Na⫹[Na⫹]o

3)⫺1 䡠 (Km,Ca⫹[Ca2⫹]o)⫺1

Naⴙ-Ca2ⴙ Exchanger Current: INaCa
INaCa⫽kNaCa 䡠 (K3
䡠 (1⫹ksat 䡠 exp[(␩⫺1) 䡠 V 䡠 F/(RT)])⫺1 䡠 {exp[␩ 䡠 V 䡠 F/(RT)]
䡠 [Na⫹]i
kNaCa: nonfailingf1000 pA/pF; heart failuref1650 pA/pF
Km,Na⫽82.5 mmol/L; Km,Ca⫽1.38 mmol/L; ksat⫽0.1; ␩⫽0.35

3 䡠 [Ca2⫹]o⫺exp[(␩⫺1) 䡠 V 䡠 F/(RT)] 䡠 [Na⫹]o

3 䡠 [Ca2⫹]i}

where ksat is the saturation factor of INaCa at very negative potentials,
and ␩ is the position of the energy barrier controlling voltage
dependence of INaCa.

Ca2ⴙ Homeostasis

CICR of JSR
Irel⫽Grel([Ca⫹]JSR⫺[Ca2⫹]i) in mmol/L per ms

Grel⫽Grel{⌬[Ca2⫹]i,2⫺⌬[Ca2⫹]i,th/(Km,rel⫹⌬[Ca2⫹]i,2⫺⌬[Ca2⫹]i,th)}
䡠 (1⫺exp[⫺t/␶on]) 䡠 exp[⫺t/␶off]
⌬[Ca2⫹]i,2⫽兺 calcium⫺influx during first 2 ms after initiation of AP
⌬[Ca2⫹]i,th⫽0.005 ␮mol/L
Km,rel⫽0.8 ␮mol/L
␶on⫽␶off⫽4 ms; t⫽0 at time of CICR

Grel⫽22 ms⫺1
where Irel is the SR Ca2⫹ release current, and Grel is the rate constant
of Ca2⫹ release from JSR.

Spontaneous Ca2ⴙ Release of JSR
Irel⫽Grel([Ca2⫹]JSR⫺[Ca2⫹]i)(1⫺exp[⫺t/␶on]) 䡠 exp[⫺t/␶off]

in mmol/L per ms

Grel⫽3 ms⫺1
␶on⫽␶off⫽4 ms; t⫽0 at time of CICR

Ca2ⴙ Uptake and Leakage of NSR: Iup and Ileak

Iup⫽Iup[Ca2⫹]i/([Ca2⫹]i⫹Km,up) in mmol/L per ms
Ileak⫽Kleak[Ca2⫹]NSR mmol/L per ms
Iup: nonfailingf0.0045; heart failuref0.0015 in mmol/L per ms
Km,up⫽0.92 ␮mol/L
Kleak: nonfailingf0.00026 ms⫺1; heart failuref0.00017 ms⫺1
where Iup is the SR Ca2⫹ uptake current, and Ileak is the leakage
current.

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

Translocation of Ca2ⴙ From NSR to JSR: Itr
Itr⫽([Ca2⫹]NSR⫺[Ca2⫹]JSR)/␶tr in mmol/L per ms
␶tr⫽180 ms
where Itr is the SR Ca2⫹ translocation current.

Ca2ⴙ Buffers in the Myoplasm: Troponin (TRPN) and
Calmodulin (CMDN)

Buffered [TRPN]⫽[TRPN]{[Ca2⫹]i/([Ca2⫹]i⫹Km,TRPN)}

Buffered [CMDN]⫽[CMDN]{[Ca2⫹]i/([Ca2⫹]i⫹Km,CMDN)}

[TRPN]⫽70 ␮mol/L

[CMDN]⫽50 ␮mol/L

Km,TRPN⫽0.5 ␮mol/L
Km,CMDN⫽2.38 ␮mol/L
where Km,TRPN is the half-saturation concentration of TRPN, and
Km,CMDN is the half-saturation concentration of CMDN.

Ca2ⴙ Buffer in JSR: Calsequestrin (CSQN)

Buffered[CSQN]⫽[CSQN]{[Ca2⫹]JSR/([Ca2⫹]JSR⫹Km,CSQN)}

[CSQN]⫽10 mmol/L

Km,CSQN⫽0.8 mmol/L
where Km,CSQN is the half-saturation concentration of CSQN.

Acknowledgments

This study was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(Be 1113/2–3) and the Bundesministerium fu¨r Bildung, Wissen-
schaft, Forschung und Technologie (01 Kans 9502). Special thanks
go to Dr M. Lindner for recording the APs.

References

1. Kjekshus J. Arrhythmias and mortality in congestive heart failure. Am J

Cardiol. 1990;65:421– 481.

2. Pogwizd SM, Hoyt RH, Saffitz JE, Corr PB, Cox JL, Cain ME. Reentrant
and focal mechanisms underlying ventricular tachycardia in the human
heart. Circulation. 1992;86:1872–1887.

3. de Bakker JMT, Coronel R, Tasseron S. Ventricular tachycardia in the
infarcted Langendorff perfused human heart: role of the arrangement of
surviving cardiac fibers. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1990;15:1594 – 607.

4. de Bakker JMT, Van Capelle FJL, Janse MJ. Reentry as a cause of
ventricular tachycardia in patients with chronic heart disease: electro-
physiological and anatomic correlation. Circulation. 1988;77:589 – 606.
5. Gilmour JRF, Heger JJ, Prystowsky EN, Zipes DP. Cellular electrophysi-
ologic abnormalities of diseased human ventricular myocardium. Am J
Cardiol. 1983;51:137–144.

6. Wiederhold KF, Nilius B. Increased sensitivity of ventricular myocardi-
um to intracellular calcium overload in Syrian cardiomyopathic hamster.
Biomed Biochim Acta. 1986;45:1333–1337.

7. Nordin C, Gilat E, Aronson RS. Delayed afterdepolarizations and
triggered activity in ventricular muscle from rats with streptozotocin-
induced diabetes. Circ Res. 1985;57:28 –34.

8. Aronson RS. Afterdepolarizations and triggered activity in hypertrophied
myocardium from rats with renal hypertension. Circ Res. 1981;48:
720 –727.

9. January CT, Riddle JM, Salata JJ. A model for early afterdepolarizations:
induction with the Ca2⫹ channel agonist Bay K 8644. Circ Res. 1988;62:
563–571.

10. January CT, Riddle JM. Early afterdepolarizations: mechanism of
induction and block: a role for L-type Ca2⫹ current. Circ Res. 1989;64:
977–990.

Priebe and Beuckelmann

June 15, 1998

1221

11. Ferrier GL, Saunders JH, Mendez C. A cellular mechanism for the
generation of ventricular arrhythmias by acetylstrophanthidin. Circ Res.
1973;32:600 – 689.

12. January CT, Fozzard HA. Delayed afterdepolarizations in heart muscle:

mechanisms and relevance. Pharmacol Rev. 1988;40:219 –227.

13. Beuckelmann DJ, Na¨bauer M, Erdmann E. Alterations of K⫹ currents in
isolated human ventricular myocytes from patients with terminal heart
failure. Circ Res. 1993;73:379 –385.

14. Wettwer E, Amos G, Gath J, Zerkowski HR, Reidemeister JC, Ravens U.
Transient outward current in human and rat ventricular myocytes. Car-
diovasc Res. 1993;27:1662–1669.

15. Mewes T, Ravens U. L-type calcium currents of human myocytes from
ventricle of non-failing and failing hearts and from atrium. J Mol Cell
Cardiol. 1994;26:1307–1320.

16. Beuckelmann DJ, Na¨bauer M, Erdmann E. Characteristics of calcium-
in isolated human ventricular myocytes from patients with

current
terminal heart failure. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1991;23:929 –937.

17. Cohen NM, Lederer WJ. Calcium current

in single human cardiac

myocytes. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 1993;4:422– 437.

18. Ouadid H, Albat B, Nargeot J. Calcium currents in diseased human

cardiac myocytes. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1995;25:282–291.

19. Na¨bauer M, Beuckelmann DJ, Erdmann E. Characteristics of transient
in human ventricular myocytes from patients with

outward current
terminal heart failure. Circ Res. 1993;73:386 –394.

20. Na¨bauer M, Beuckelmann DJ, U¨ berfuhr P, Steinbeck G. Regional dif-
ferences in current density and rate-dependent properties of the transient
outward current in subepicardial and subendocardial myocytes of human
left ventricle. Circulation. 1996;93:168 –177.

21. Li GR, Feng J, Yue L, Carrier M, Nattel S. Evidence for two components
of delayed rectifier K⫹ current in human ventricular myocytes. Circ Res.
1996;78:689 – 696.

22. Koumi S, Backer CL, Arentzen CE. Characterization of inwardly rec-
tifying K⫹ channel in human cardiac myocytes. Alterations in channel
behavior in myocytes isolated from patients with idiopathic dilated car-
diomyopathy. Circulation. 1995;92:164 –174.

23. Be´nitah JP, Bailly P, D’Agrosa MC, Da P, Delgado C, Lorente P. Slow
inward current in single myocytes isolated from adult human ventricles.
Pflugers Arch. 1992;421:176 –187.

24. Veldkamp MW, van Ginneken AC, Opthof T, Bouman LN. Delayed
rectifier channels in human ventricular myocytes. Circulation. 1995;92:
3497–3504.

25. Sakakibara Y, Furukawa T, Singer DH, Jia H, Backer CL, Arentzen CE,
Wasserstrom JA. Sodium current in isolated human ventricular myocytes.
Am J Physiol. 1993;265:H1301–H1309.

26. Gwathmey JK, Copelas L, MacKinnon R, Schoen FJ, Feldman MD,
Grossman W, Morgan JP. Abnormal intracellular calcium handling in
myocardium from patients with end-stage heart failure. Circ Res. 1987;
61:70 –76.

27. Beuckelmann DJ, Na¨bauer M, Erdmann E. Intracellular calcium handling
in isolated ventricular myocytes from patients with terminal heart failure.
Circulation. 1992;85:1046 –1055.

28. Reinecke H, Studer R, Vetter R, Holtz J, Drexler H. Cardiac Na⫹/Ca2⫹
exchange activity in patients with end-stage heart failure. Cardiovasc Res.
1996;31:48 –54.

29. Flesch M, Schwinger RHG, Schiffer F, Frank K, Su¨dkamp M, Kuhn-
Regnier F, Arnold G, Bo¨hm M. Evidence for functional relevance of an
enhanced expression of the Na⫹-Ca2⫹ exchanger in failing human myo-
cardium. Circulation. 1996;94:992–1002.

30. Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. A quantitative description of membrane current
and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J Physiol
(Lond). 1952;117:500 –544.

31. Luo C-H, Rudy Y. A dynamic model of the cardiac ventricular action
potential, I: simulations of ionic currents and concentration changes. Circ
Res. 1994;74:1071–1096.

32. Sipido KR, Callewaert G, Carmeliet E. Inhibition and rapid recovery of
Ca2⫹ current during Ca2⫹ release from sarcoplasmic reticulum in guinea
pig ventricular myocytes. Circ Res. 1995;76:102–109.

33. De Leon M, Wang Y, Jones L, Perez-Reyes E, Wei X, Wah Soong T,
Snutch TP, Yue DT. Essential Ca2⫹-binding motif for Ca2⫹-sensitive
inactivation of L-type Ca2⫹ channels. Science. 1995;270:1502–1505.

34. Sanguinetti MC, Jurkiewicz NK. Two components of cardiac delayed
rectifier K⫹ current: differential sensitivity to block by class III antiar-
rhythmic agents. J Gen Physiol. 1990;96:195–215.

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

1222

Cellular Electric Properties in Heart Failure

35. Splawski I, Tristani-Firouzi M, Lehmann MH, Sanguinetti MC, Keating
MT. Mutations in the hmink gene cause long QT syndrome and suppress
IKs function. Nat Genet. 1997;17:338 –340.

36. Those N. Calcium-sensitive delayed rectifier potassium current in guinea

pig ventricular cells. Am J Physiol. 1990;258:H1200 –H1207.

37. Sanguinetti MC, Jurkiewicz NK. Role of external Ca2⫹ and K⫹ in gating
of cardiac delayed rectifier K⫹ currents. Pflugers Arch. 1992;420:
180 –186.

38. Sham JSK, Hatem SN, Morad M. Species differences in the activity of the
Na⫹-Ca2⫹ exchanger in mammalian cardiac myocytes. J Physiol (Lond).
1995;488:3:623– 631.

39. Peeters GA, Sanguinetti MC, Eki Y, Konarzewska H, Renlund DG,
Karwande SV, Barry WH. Method for isolation of human ventricular
myocytes from single endocardial and epicardial biopsies. Am J Physiol.
1995;268:H1757–H1764.

40. Shamraj OI, Grupp IL, Grupp G, Melvin D, Gradoux N, Kremers W,
Lingrel JB, De Pover A. Characterisation of Na/K-ATPase, its isoforms,
and the inotropic response to oubain in isolated failing human hearts.
Cardiovasc Res. 1993;27:2229 –2237.

41. Holmberg SR, Williams AJ. The calcium-release channel from cardiac
sarcoplasmic reticulum: function in the failing and acutely ischemic heart.
Circ Res. 1989;65:1445–1449.

42. Schumacher C, Konigs B, Sigmund M, Kohne B, Schondube F, Vob M,
Stein B, Weil J, Hanrath P. The ryanodine binding sarcoplasmic reticulum
calcium release channel in nonfailing and in failing human myocardium.
Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1995;353:80 – 85.

43. Gwathmey JK, Hajjar RJ. Relation between steady-state force and intra-
index of myofibrillar

cellular [Ca2⫹]i
responsiveness to Ca2⫹. Circulation. 1990;82:1266 –1278.

in intact human myocardium:

44. Meyer M, Schillinger W, Pieske B, Holubarsch C, Heilmann C, Posival
H, Kuwajima G, Mikoshiba K, Just H, Hasenfuss G. Alterations of
sarcoplasmic reticulum proteins in failing human dilated cardiomyopathy.
Circulation. 1995;92:778 –784.

45. Hilgemann DW, Noble D. Excitation-contraction coupling and extra-
cellular calcium transients in rabbit atrium: reconstruction of basic
cellular mechanism. Proc R Soc Lond. 1987;230:163–205.

46. Schwinger RH, Bo¨hm M, Schmidt U, Karczewski P, Bavendiek U, Flesch
M, Krause EG, Erdmann E. Unchanged protein levels of SERCA II and
phospholamban but reduced Ca2⫹ uptake and Ca2⫹-ATPase activity of
cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum from dilated cardiomyopathy patients
compared with patients with nonfailing hearts. Circulation. 1995;92:
3220 –3228.

47. Hasenfuss G, Reinecke H, Studer R, Meyer M, Pieske B, Holtz J,
Holubarsch C, Posival H, Just H, Drexler H. Relation between myo-
cardial function and expression of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2⫹-
ATPase in failing and nonfailing human myocardium. Circ Res. 1994;
75:434 – 442.

48. Beuckelmann DJ, Na¨bauer M, Kru¨ger C, Erdmann E. Altered diastolic
[Ca2⫹]i handling in human ventricular myocytes from patients with
terminal heart failure. Am Heart J. 1995;129:684 – 689.

49. Lindner M, Erdmann E, Beuckelmann DJ. Calcium content of the sarco-
plasmic reticulum in isolated ventricular myocytes from patients with
terminal heart failure. J Mol Cell Cardiol. In press.

50. Coltart DJ, Meldrum SJ. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: an electrophys-

iological study. Br Med J. 1970;4:217–218.

51. Morgan JM, Cunningham D, Rowland E. Electrical restitution in the
endocardium of the intact human right ventricle. Br Heart J. 1992;67:
42– 46.

52. Franz MR, Swerdlow CD, Liem LB, Schaefer J. Cycle length dependence
of human action potential duration in vivo: effects of single extrastimuli,
sudden sustained rate acceleration and deceleration, and different
steady-state frequencies. J Clin Invest. 1988;82:972–979.

53. Berger F, Borchard U, Hafner D, Kammer T, Weis T. Modulation of
action potential duration by inhibition of the transient outward current in
sheep cardiac Purkinje fibers. Basis Res Cardiol. 1995;90:185–191.

54. Ka¨ab S, Nuss HB, Chiamvimonvat N, O’Rourke B, Pak PH, Kass DA,
Marban E, Tomaselli GF. Ionic mechanism of action potential prolon-
gation in ventricular myocytes from dogs with pacing-induced heart
failure. Circ Res. 1996;78:262–273.

55. Navarro-Polanco RA, Sanchez-Chapula JA. 4-Aminopyridine activates
potassium currents by activation of a muscarinic receptor in feline atrial
myocytes. J Physiol (Lond). 1997;498:3:663– 678.

56. Zeng J, Laurita KR, Rosenbaum DS, Rudy Y. Two components of the
delayed rectifier K⫹ current in ventricular myocytes of the guinea pig

type: theoretical formulation and their role in repolarization. Circ Res.
1995;77:140 –152.

57. Huikuri HV, Yli-Mayry S. Frequency dependent effects of d-sotalol and
amiodarone on the action potential duration of the human right ventricle.
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1992;15:2103–2107.

58. Hayward RP, Taggart P. Effect of sotalol on human atrial action potential
duration and refractoriness: cycle length dependency of class III activity.
Cardiovasc Res. 1986;20:100 –107.

59. Newman D, Dorian P, Feder-Elituv R. Isoproterenol antagonizes drug-
induced prolongation of action potential duration in humans. Can
J Physiol Pharmacol. 1993;71:755–760.

60. Carlsson L, Abrahamsson C, Almgren O, Lundberg C, Duker G.
Prolonged action potential duration and positive inotropy induced by
the novel class III antiarrhythmic agent H 234/09 (almokalant) in
isolated human ventricular muscle. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1991;
18:882– 887.

61. Wettwer E, Grundke M, Ravens U. Differential effects of the new class
III antiarrhythmic agents almokalant, E-4031 and D-sotalol, and of
quinidine, on delayed rectifier currents in guinea pig ventricular
myocytes. Cardiovasc Res. 1992;26:1145–1152.

62. Fedida D, Noble D, Rankin AC, Spindler AJ. The arrhythmogenic
transient inward current Iti and related contraction in isolated guinea-pig
ventricular myocytes. J Physiol (Lond). 1987;392:523–542.

63. Giles W, Shimoni Y. Comparison of sodium-calcium exchanger and
transient inward currents in single cells from rabbit ventricle. J Physiol
(Lond). 1989;417:465– 481.

64. Luo CH, Rudy Y. A model of the ventricular cardiac action potential.
Depolarization, repolarization, and their interaction. Circ Res. 1991;68:
1501–1526.

65. Yue L, Feng J, Li GR, Nattel S. Transient outward and delayed rectifier
currents in canine atrium: properties and role of isolation methods. Am J
Physiol. 1996;270:H2157–H2168.

66. Thuringer D, Deroubaix E, Coulombe A, Coraboeuf E, Mercadier JJ.
Ionic basis of the action potential prolongation in ventricular myocytes
from Syrian hamsters with dilated cardiomyopathy. Cardiovasc Res.
1996;31:747–757.

67. Cerbai E, Barbieri M, Li Q, Mugelli A. Ionic basis of action potential
prolongation of hypertrophied cardiac myocytes isolated from hyper-
tensive rats of different ages. Cardiovasc Res. 1994;28:1180 –1187.

68. Nygren A, Fiset C, Clark JW, Lindblad DS, Clark RB, Giles WR.
Mathematical model of an adult human atrial cell: the role of K⫹ currents
in repolarization. Circ Res. 1998;82:63– 81.

69. Firek L, Giles WR. Outward currents underlying repolarization in human

atrial myocytes. Cardiovasc Res. 1995;30:31–38.

70. Stern MD, Capogrossi MC, Lakatta EG. Spontaneous calcium release
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum in myocardial cells: mechanisms and
consequences. Cell Calcium. 1988;9:247–256.

71. Capogrossi MC, Houser SR, Bahinski A, Lakatta EG. Synchronous
occurrence of spontaneous localized calcium release from the sarco-
plasmic reticulum generates action potentials in rat cardiac ventricular
myocytes at normal resting membrane potential. Circ Res. 1987;61:
498 –503.

72. Aronson RS. Afterdepolarizations and triggered activity in hypertrophied
myocardium from rats with renal hypertension. Circ Res. 1981;48:
720 –727.

73. Vermeulen JT, McGuire MA, Opthof T, Coronel R, de Bakker JMT,
Klo¨pping C, Janse MJ. Triggered activity and automaticity in ventricular
trabeculae of failing human and rabbit hearts. Cardiovasc Res. 1994;28:
1547–1554.

74. Ehara T, Noma A, Ono K. Calcium-activated non-selective cation
channels in ventricular cells isolated from adult guinea-pig hearts.
J Physiol (Lond). 1988;403:117–133.

75. Cannell MB, Lederer WJ. The arrhythmogenic current Iti in the absence
of electrogenic sodium-calcium exchange in sheep cardiac Purkinje
fibres. J Physiol (Lond). 1986;374:201–219.

76. Luo CH, Rudy Y. A dynamic model of the cardiac ventricular action
potential, II: afterdepolarizations, triggered activity, and potentiation.
Circ Res. 1994;74:1097–1113.

77. Nordin C, Ming Z. Computer model of current-induced early afterdepo-
larizations in guinea pig ventricular myocytes. Am J Physiol. 1995;268:
H2440 –H2459.

78. Zeng J, Rudy Y. Early afterdepolarizations in cardiac myocytes:

mechanism and rate dependence. Biophys J. 1995;68:949 –964.

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

Priebe and Beuckelmann

June 15, 1998

1223

79. Cranfield PF, Aronson RS. Cardiac Arrhythmias: The Role of Triggered
Activity and Other Mechanisms. New York, NY: Futura Publishing Co Inc;
1988.

80. Keung EC, Aronson RS. Nonuniform electrophysiological properties and
electrotonic interaction in hypertrophied rat myocardium. Circ Res. 1981;
49:150 –158.

81. Aronson RS, Ming Z. Cellular mechanisms of arrhythmias in hyper-
trophied and failing myocardium. Circulation. 1993;87[suppl VII]:VII-
76 –VII-83.

82. Gintant GA. Regional differences in IK density in canine left ventricle: role of

IK,s in electrical heterogeneity. Am J Physiol. 1995;268:H604–H613.

83. Drouin E, Charpentier F, Gauthier C, Laurent K Le Marec H. Electro-
physiologic characteristics of cells spanning the left ventricular wall of
human heart: evidence for presence of M cells. J Am Coll Cardiol.
1995;26:185–192.

84. Keung ECH, Keung CS, Aronson RS. Passive electrical properties of normal

and hypertrophied rat myocardium. Am J Physiol. 1982;243:H917–H926.

85. Nordin C. Computer model of membrane current and intracellular Ca2⫹
flux in the isolated guinea pig ventricular myocyte. Am J Physiol. 1993;
265:H2117–H2136.

86. DiFrancesco D, Noble D. A model of cardiac electrical activity incorpo-
rating ionic pumps and concentration changes. Philos Trans R Soc Lond.
1985;307:353–398.

87. Rasmusson RL, Clark JW, Giles WR, Robinson K, Clark RB, Shibata EF,
Campbell DL. A mathematical model of electrophysiological activity in
a bullfrog atrial cell. Am J Physiol. 1990;259:H370 –H389.

88. Lindblad DS, Murphey CR, Clark JW, Giles WR. A model af the action
potential and underlying membrane currents in a rabbit atrial cell. Am J
Physiol. 1996;271:H1666 –H1696.

89. Shaw RB, Rudy Y. Electrophysiologic effects of acute myocardial ische-
mia: a theoretical study of altered cell excitability and action potential
duration. Cardiovasc Res. 1997;35:256 –272.

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

Simulation Study of Cellular Electric Properties in Heart Failure

Leo Priebe and Dirk J. Beuckelmann

Circ Res.(cid:160)

1998;82:1206-1223

doi: 10.1161/01.RES.82.11.1206

Circulation Research 

is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
Copyright © 1998 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.

Print ISSN: 0009-7330. Online ISSN: 1524-4571 

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the

World Wide Web at: 

 
http://circres.ahajournals.org/content/82/11/1206

Circulation Research

 Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published

Permissions:
in
 can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the
Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is 
located, click Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information
about this process is available in the
(cid:160) 
Reprints:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
(cid:160) 
Subscriptions:
http://circres.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
 
(cid:160) 

 Information about reprints can be found online at: 

 Information about subscribing to 

Permissions and Rights Question and Answer 

document. 

Circulation Research 

is online at: 

 

Downloaded from 

http://circres.ahajournals.org/

 by guest on June 29, 2015

