Circulation Journal
Official Journal of the Japanese Circulation Society
http://www.j-circ.or.jp

ORIGINAL  ARTICLE
Arrhythmia/Electrophysiology

Transmural Dispersion of Repolarization Determines Scroll  

Wave Behavior During Ventricular Tachyarrhythmias

– A Simulation Study –

Ryo Haraguchi, PhD; Takashi Ashihara, MD, PhD; Tsunetoyo Namba, MD, PhD;  
Kunichika Tsumoto, PhD; Shingo Murakami, PhD; Yoshihisa Kurachi, MD, PhD;  

Takanori Ikeda, MD, PhD; Kazuo Nakazawa, PhD

Background:  Ventricular tachyarrhythmia is the leading cause of sudden cardiac death, and scroll wave re-entry 
is known to underlie this condition. Class III antiarrhythmic drugs are commonly used worldwide to treat ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias; however, these drugs have a proarrhythmic adverse effect and can cause Torsade de Pointes 
or ventricular fibrillation. Transmural dispersion of repolarization (TDR) has been suggested to be a strong indi-
cator of ventricular tachyarrhythmia induction. However, the role of TDR during sustained scroll wave re-entry is 
poorly understood. The purpose of the present study was to investigate how TDR affects scroll wave behavior 
and to provide a novel analysis of the mechanisms that sustain tachyarrhythmias, using computer simulations.

Methods and Results:  Computer simulations were carried out to quantify the TDR and QT interval under a 
variety of IKs and IKr during transmural conduction. Simulated scroll wave re-entries were done under a variety of 
IKs and IKr in a ventricular wall slab model, and the scroll wave behavior and the filament dynamics (3-dimensional 
organizing center) were analyzed. A slight increase in TDR, but not in the QT interval, reflected antiarrhythmic 
properties resulting from the restraint of scroll wave breakup, whereas a marked increase in TDR was proarrhyth-
mic, as a result of scroll wave breakup.

Conclusions:  The  TDR  determines  the  sustainment  of  ventricular  tachyarrhythmias,  through  control  of  the 
scroll wave filament dynamics.    (Circ J  2011; 75: 80 – 88)

Key Words:  Filament;  Scroll  wave  re-entry;  Simulation;  Transmural  dispersion  of  repolarization;  Ventricular 

tachyarrhythmias/fibrillation

C

lass  III  antiarrhythmic  drugs  primarily  block  potas-
sium channels, thereby prolonging both the cardiac 
action  potential  duration  (APD)  and  QT  interval. 
Prolongation  of  the  APD  with  no  change  in  conduction 
velocity terminates re-entrant tachyarrhythmias. Conversely, 
class III antiarrhythmic drugs have a proarrhythmic adverse 
effect,  because  prolonged  APD  causes  ventricular  tachyar-
rhythmias, particularly Torsade de Pointes (TdP)1 and ven-
tricular fibrillation (VF).

Editorial p 49

The mechanisms underlying drug-induced cardiac arrhyth-

mias are not well understood, but it is widely accepted that 
the marked prolongation in APD and QT interval induced by 
IKr-blockade, especially during bradycardia, forms the sub-
strate for the TdP and/or VF. Optical mapping studies have 
demonstrated  that  transmural  dispersion  of  repolarization 
(TDR)  plays  a  critical  role  in  the  initiation  of  TdP/VF  in 
canine models of type-2 long QT syndrome (LQTS) and heart 
failure.2,3  Furthermore,  recent  experimental  studies  using 
intracellular  floating  microelectrodes  in  arterially  perfused 
canine  left  ventricular  wedge  preparations  suggested  that 
TDR was a strong indicator of TdP/VF induction.4–6 Shimizu 
and  Antzelevitch  suggested  that  antiarrhythmic  drugs  that 
prolong the QT interval do not always have a proarrhythmic 

Received January 25, 2010; revised manuscript received August 12, 2010; accepted August 20, 2010; released online November 16, 

2010    Time for primary review: 45 days

National  Cerebral  and  Cardiovascular  Center  Research  Institute,  Suita  (R.H.,  K.N.);  Department  of  Cardiovascular  and  Respiratory 
Medicine, Heart Rhythm Center, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu (T.A.); Faculty of Healthcare Sciences, Himeji Dokkyo 
University, Himeji (T.N.); The Center for Advanced Medical Engineering and Informatics, Osaka University, Suita (K.T.); Depart-
ment  of  Pharmacology,  Graduate  School  of  Medicine,  Osaka  University,  Suita  (S.M., Y.K.);  and  Second  Department  of  Internal 
Medicine, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Mitaka (T.I.), Japan

Mailing address:  Ryo Haraguchi, PhD, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, 5-7-1 Fujishiro-dai, Suita 565-

8565, Japan.    E-mail: haraguch@ri.ncvc.go.jp
ISSN-1346-9843    doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-10-0071
All rights are reserved to the Japanese Circulation Society. For permissions, please e-mail: cj@j-circ.or.jp

Circulation Journal  Vol.75,  January  2011

TDR Determines Scroll Wave Behavior

81

Figure 1.    (A) 3-dimensional (D) ventricular wall slab model and (B) transmural 1-D model. Endo, Mid, and Epi indicate endo-
cardial, mid-myocardial, and epicardial layers, respectively. (C) Action potential (AP) waveforms at Endo (red), Mid (green), 
and Epi (blue). (D) Space-time plot of membrane potentials. These waveforms and membrane potentials were measured after 
31 constant pacing stimuli of 5-ms duration and 20-μA strength were applied to the endocardial units at a cycle of length of 
1,000 ms. TDR, transmural dispersion of repolarization.

Table.  Maximum Conductances of I Ks in the Model

Endo
Mid
Epi

Original I Ks model 

(mS/μF)
0.08240 · A
0.04118 · A
0.08240 · A

Reduced I Ks model 

(mS/μF)

0.01648 · A　　
0.008236 · A
0.01648 · A　　

0.6

[Ca2+]i

 1 + (                )

 
A = 1 +                             
 
 0.000038  1.4
 
 
Endo,  endocardial;  Mid,  mid-myocardial;  Epi,  epicardial;  [Ca2+]i, 
intracellular concentration of Ca2+.

Figure 2.    An S1-S2 method for generating a scroll wave in 
the ventricular wall slab model. S1 indicates the first planar 
wave that propagates from left to right along the x-axis. The 
pink-coded region represents the excitation wave (both the 
depolarized  and  repolarizing  region),  whereas  the  color-
less region represents the excitable area (repolarized region 
following  the  S1  planar  wave).  S2  is  a  premature  stimulus 
(yellow region) in globular shape. The scroll wave starts to 
rotate around a filament (blue line) in a transmural location.

adverse effect, but the reduction of TDR might eliminate the 
substrate  for  re-entry  induction.4  Diego  et  al  demonstrated 
that the risk for TdP induction was related to the increase in 
TDR, rather than in the QT interval.7

Scroll wave re-entry is the active source of excitation that 
sustains ventricular tachyarrhythmias. However, the role of 
TDR during scroll wave re-entry is not well understood. To 
investigate  how  TDR  affects  the  behavior  of  scroll  wave  
re-entry, we conducted computer simulations of scroll wave 
re-entries under various conditions of TDR in a 3-dimensional 
(D)  ventricular  wall  slab  model.  We  have  been  conducting 
many  computer  simulations  of  scroll  wave  re-entries  in  an 
anatomically-detailed 3-D ventricular model.8,9 Through this 
research,  we  revealed  that  anatomical  features  play  an  im-

portant  role  when  considering  the  behavior  of  scroll  wave 
re-entries. In this research, therefore, we removed anatomical 
features that were expected to lead to complications and over-
analysis as much as possible. We focused on the dynamics 
of the filament, the scroll wave-organizing center, to simplify 
and quantify the complex spatiotemporal activity during scroll 
wave re-entry.10

Methods

The membrane kinetics in the simulated myocardium were 
produced  by  Luo-Rudy  dynamic  model  equations11  with 
modification of the L-type calcium channel formulation and 
introduction of 4 representative types of IKr-blockade: dofet-
ilide, quinidine, vesnarinone, and nifekalant.12,13 Dofetilide-
induced blockade is voltage- and time-independent, quinidine-
induced  blockade  is  fast-voltage-  and  time-dependent,  and 
vesnarinone-induced  blockade  is  slow-voltage-  and  time-
dependent. Nifekalant-induced blockade was simulated using 
a steady-state activation curve of IKr kinetics shifted positive-
ly.14 The numerical approach for integration of IKr-blockades 
has  been  described  in  Appendix 1.  We  used  the  forward 
Euler method for integral calculation.8,9,15

The transmural gradient (electrical heterogeneity through 
the  ventricular  wall)  was  achieved  with  the  distribution 
through the epicardial, mid-myocardial (M-cell), and endocar-

Circulation Journal  Vol.75,  January  2011

82

HARAGUCHI R et al.

Figure 3.    (A) Transmural  dispersion  of  repolarization  (TDR)  2-dimensional  (D)  maps  in  the  presence  of  each  drug  (pacing 
cycle is 1,000 ms) in the transmural 1-D model. White areas indicate conditions where TDR could not be calculated because 
the action potential duration was longer than the length of the pacing cycle. (B,C) TDR as a function of ydepolarization in the pres-
ence of each drug in the original and reduced IKs models, respectively. (D,E) Relationship between TDR and QT interval in the 
original and the reduced IKs models, respectively.

dial layers (Figures 1A and 1B) with thicknesses of 0.35 cm, 
0.50 cm, and 0.15 cm, respectively. We configured the total 
thickness to be 1.0 cm by considering the human left ven-
tricle. According to experimental data, the M-cell layer was 
located deep within the subendocardium.5 These spatial set-
tings can be found in our previous publication,16 which dem-
onstrated  that  the  normal  12-lead  electrocardiograms  were 
properly reconstructed under those spatial settings. Electrical 
settings  were  achieved  by  modifications  of  IKr,  IKs,  Ito,  and 
IKp.13 Figures 1C and 1D show the control for the transmural 
gradient used in this study.

The ventricular wall slab model was 6.0 × 6.0 × 1.0 cm, and 
consisted of 10,560,000 discrete myocardial units (Figure 1A). 
We  considered  a  sufficiently  large  size  that  allows  scroll 
waves  to  rotate  during  a  simulation  time.  As  a  result,  we 
used the same size as the ventricular wall slab model in our 
previous publication.17 The tissue border was set to no-flux 
Neumann boundary conditions. The conduction velocity was 
set at 59, 18, and 40 cm/s in the x-, y-, and z-axes, respec-
tively, based on experimental data.5,18,19

The  TDR  was  quantified  during  transmural  conduction  
by performing simulations of consistent endocardial pacing 

Circulation Journal  Vol.75,  January  2011

TDR Determines Scroll Wave Behavior

83

using the 1-D model shown in Figure 1B. Thirty-one pacing 
stimuli of 5-ms duration and 20-μA strength were applied to 
the endocardial units at a cycle length of 1,000 ms to achieve 
steady  state.  After  the  last  pacing  stimulus,  we  measured 
APD and conduction time in all myocardial units of the 1-D 
model. The APD was measured at –75 mV (close to APD90), 
then both TDR and QT interval were calculated. To visualize 
the effects of the various ion channel blockers on TDR, we 
adopted a 2-D mapping method.13 We repeated simulations 
systematically with various IKs channel conductance levels in 
increments of 1% and various ydepolarization (IKr amplitude).13

Scroll  waves  were  generated  using  a  S1-S2  cross-field 
stimulation  (Figure 2).17  A  premature  stimulus  (S2),  as  a 
part of the globular shape, was applied when the refractory 
tail (S1 tail) of the 6th planar wave had just passed through 
the center of the ventricular wall slab model.

Potassium channels play a key role in the development of 
TDR,  and  therefore  we  modified  IKs  and  IKr  conductances 
independently to produce various TDR. In the present study, 
the reduced IKs model was an 80% reduction in the IKs origi-
nal value (100%)13 (Table).

We  set  the  simulation  time  to  1,500 ms  after  the  S2  
stimulus due to computer performance. Except for a few cases 
of very long QT interval (>550 ms), this simulation time was 
enough  for  the  scroll  waves  to  rotate ≥6 times,  which  was 
generally considered as sustained tachyarrhythmia.20 In addi-
tion, even in the cases of very long QT intervals, we con-
sidered the simulation time was enough to define sustained 
tachyarrhythmia  because  of  the  frequent  wave  breakups, 
which  can  increase  the  number  of  scroll  waves  during  the 
simulation time.

Our preliminary simulations with significantly longer TDR 
and QT interval showed that frequent scroll wave breakups 
occurred immediately after the S2 stimulus. Thus, we strong-
ly believe that the length of simulation time was sufficient to 
observe the scroll wave behavior in all of the simulations in 
this study.

The  scroll  wave  filaments  were  expressed  as  a  contin-
uum  of phase singularities, defined as spatial points where 
all phase values converged in a phase map.21,22

Results

Variations in TDR With IKr- and IKs- Blockade in a 1-D  
Transmural Model
Figure 3A shows the TDR as a function of IKs and ydepolarization, 
where  ydepolarization  describes  the  degree  of  IKr  blockade  by 
dofetilide, quinidine, vesnarinone, and nifekalant at a pacing 
cycle of 1,000 ms in the transmural 1-D model (Figure 1B). 
At  the  IKs  original  value  (IKs  100%)  the  TDR  remained  at 
~20 ms, regardless of the ydepolarization value (Figure 3B). The 
effect on the TDR was similar for all 4 IKr-blockers. In con-
trast, when the IKs was reduced to 20%, an inverse corre-
lation  was  observed  between  the  TDR  and  the  ydepolarization 
(Figure 3C). Under these conditions, dofetilide and nifeka-
lant produced significantly longer TDR values than did quin-
idine or vesnarinone.

As shown in Figure 3D, the simulated ECG with various 
ydepolarization values revealed neither a marked prolongation of 
TDR nor a long QT interval at IKs 100%, and we observed  
a dip in TDR with a QT interval in the range below 400 ms. 
Similarly, we observed a dip in TDR as well in IKs 20% case; 
however, we found marked prolongation of TDR with a posi-
tive correlation with a QT interval (Figure 3E).

The  effect  of  the  4  IKr-blockers  on  the  relationship  be-

tween the TDR and QT interval was quite similar at IKs 100% 
(Figure 3D). In contrast, at IKs 20%, the 4 IKr-blockers pro-
duced different effects on the relationship between the TDR 
and  QT  interval.  For  example,  when  the  QT  interval  was 
above ~500 ms, vesnarinone and dofetilide produced the lon-
gest and shortest TDR, respectively. Thus, a reduction in IKs 
facilitated  the  IKr  blockade-mediated  increase  in  TDR  and 
revealed  the  differential  effects  of  the  IKr-blockers  on  the 
TDR (Figures 3C and 3E).

TDR Influence on Filament Dynamics in the Ventricular Wall
The  TDR  was  23.7 ms  in  the  control  condition  (ydepolarization 
100% and IKs 100%; Figure 4A, Leftmost panel). With this 
TDR, the mother-daughter type scroll wave re-entries were 
sustained  for  1,500 ms  after  S2  onset  (Figure 4A,  Middle 
3 panels;  Supplementary  Movie 1).  The  mother  re-entry 
rotated around a transmural I-shaped filament that bent spon-
taneously and occasionally fragmented. The fragmented fila-
ments  were  classified  into  2 types:  the  S-filament  (blue)  in 
which both fragment ends touched the epicardial or endocar-
dial surface, and the NS-filament (green) in which the fragment 
ends  did  not  touch  a  surface.  The  S-filament  accompanied 
the  rotating  scroll  wave  and  the  NS-filament  signified  the 
wavebreak of the drifting (non-rotating) scroll wave. Thus, 
the daughter scroll wave re-entries were always accompanied 
by  the  fragmented  S-filaments  generated  by  the  occasional 
fragmentations of the bent I-shaped filament of the mother 
scroll wave re-entry.

The  total  length  of  the  S-filaments  (blue  line)  and  NS- 
filaments (green line) varied markedly with time (Figure 4A, 
Rightmost panel). Both the filament bending and the filament 
fragmentations increased the total length of the S-filaments. 
Filaments that were aligned parallel to the myocardial fiber 
transformed from S-filaments into NS-filaments (correspond-
ing to a decrease in the S-filaments length and an increase in 
the NS-filament length). A filament shift resulting in a colli-
sion between the NS-filament and the tissue boundaries (lat-
eral edges of the ventricular wall slab) caused a decrease in 
the total length of the NS-filaments. The filaments aligned on 
the border between the epicardial and mid-myocardial layers. 
The S-filament bent at the border between the epicardial and 
mid-myocardial layers, and the NS-filament aligned on the 
same  border.  The  border  between  the  epicardial  and  mid-
myocardial layers was close to the plane with the maximum 
slope of transmural gradient in repolarization time.

The  smaller  19.5 ms  TDR  (Figure 4B,  Leftmost  panel) 
produced by the dofetilide-type IKr blockade and original IKs 
(ydepolarization 20% and IKs 100%, respectively) resulted in the 
continuation of the S-filament associated with the single scroll 
wave  re-entry  and  a  short-lived  NS-filament  (Figure 4B, 
Middle 3 panels; Supplementary Movie 2). In this example, 
the scroll wave re-entry was terminated by the annihilation 
of all S-filaments at 1,475 ms after the S2 onset.

When  the  bending  and  fragmentation  of  the  S-filaments 
were  restrained,  the  total  length  of  both  the  S-  and  NS- 
filaments was shorter, compared with the control condition 
(Figures 4A  and  4B,  Rightmost  panels).  The  short-lived 
NS-filaments  aligned  parallel  to  the  myocardial  fibers  and 
were located in the mid-myocardial layer in the vicinity of 
the epicardium.

The  larger  78.0 ms  TDR  (Figure 4C,  Leftmost  panel) 
produced by the dofetilide-type IKr blockade and reduced IKs 
(ydepolarization  15%  and  IKs  20%)  resulted  in  frequent  scroll 
wave  breakups  accompanied  by  the  fragmentation  and/or 
neogenesis of the S-filaments (Figure 4C, Middle 3 panels; 

Circulation Journal  Vol.75,  January  2011

84

HARAGUCHI R et al.

Figure 4.    The  transmural  distribution  of  repolarization  time  (Leftmost  panel),  the  snapshots  of  filament  dynamics  (Middle 
3 panels), and the temporal variation of the total filament length in the ventricular wall slab model (Rightmost panel). S-filament 
(blue) and NS-filament (green) lengths. Repolarization time (y-axis in leftmost panel) equals APD90 plus conduction time in each 
myocardial unit. Transmural distances at 0% and 100% represent epicardium and endocardium, respectively. Supplemental 
online data I through III are movie supplements corresponding to panels (A) through (C), respectively. APD, action potential 
duration; TDR, transmural dispersion of repolarization

Supplementary Movie 3). The fragmentation of the I-shaped 
S-filament  was  derived  from  the  filament  bending.  In  con-
trast, the neogenesis of the U-shaped S-filament was derived 
from the wavefront-wavetail interaction. Most of the NS-fil-
aments were derived from the S-filaments that were aligned 
parallel to the myocardial fibers located at the mid-myocar-
dial layer in the vicinity of the endocardium. The alignment 
location was in the vicinity of the plane with the maximum 
slope of transmural gradient in repolarization time, whereas 
the  alignment  location  was  shifted  toward  the  plane  with 
the shorter repolarization time. Under these conditions, the 
total length of the S- and NS-filaments varied markedly with 
time, similar to the control condition; however, the total fila-
ment  lengths  were  much  longer  than  the  control  condition 
(Figures 4A and 4C, Rightmost panels). The filament neo-
genesis resulting from the wavefront-wavetail interaction was 
responsible for an increase in the total length of S-filaments. 
The other behaviors of the filaments were similar to those in 
the control condition (see Supplementary Movies 1 and 3).

Relationship Between TDR and Total S-Filament Length
Simulations of scroll wave re-entries were conducted in the 
same ventricular wall slab model using the 4 IKr-blockers in 

various ydepolarization and IKs conditions: original IKs (IKs 100%) 
with a ydepolarization of 50%, 30%, 20%, and 15% (filled cir-
cles in Figures 3B and 3D) and reduced IKs (IKs 20%) with 
ydepolarization of 75%, 50%, 40%, 30%, 25%, 20%, 18%, 15%, 
and 12% (filled circles in Figures 3C and 3E). The relation-
ship between the TDR and the average total S-filament length 
during the simulation time (1,000 ms from 500 ms after the 
S2 stimulus) is shown in Figure 5.

The  TDR  was  23.7 ms  in  the  control  condition  and  the 
average  S-filament  total  length  was  311.5 units  (refer  to  a 
black filled circle with an arrow in Figure 5).

When  the  IKr-blockade  produced  a  TDR  ranging  from  
23.7 to 58.3 ms, the average S-filament total length was sig-
nificantly shorter than that observed in the control condition 
(~150 units). The filament dynamics (not shown) were similar 
to those shown in Figure 4B; both the bending and fragmen-
tation  of  the  S-filaments  were  restrained,  and,  as  a  conse-
quence, the transmural I-shaped S-filaments were sustained 
and the NS-filaments were short-lived.

When  the  IKr-blockade  produced  a  TDR  shorter  than 
23.7 ms,  the  average  S-filament  total  length  was  increased 
by the decrease in the TDR, and reached ~330 units, approxi-
mately  the  same  length  observed  in  the  control  condition. 

Circulation Journal  Vol.75,  January  2011

TDR Determines Scroll Wave Behavior

85

Figure 5.    Relationship  between  the 
transmural dispersion of repolarization 
(TDR) and the average S-filament total 
length.

The  filament  dynamics  (not  shown)  were  similar  to  those 
shown in Figure 4A; the bending and fragmentation of the 
S-filaments  and  the  transition  from  S-filaments  to  NS-fila-
ments occurred frequently.

When the TDR ranged from 58.3 to 80.0 ms, the average 
S-filament total length increased in proportion to the increase 
in TDR, and the length was ~800 units when the TDR reached 
~80 ms. The filament dynamics (not shown) were similar to 
those shown in Figure 4C; bending, fragmentation, and neo-
genesis of the S-filaments were frequently observed, and the 
transition  from  S-filaments  to  NS-filaments  occurred  more 
often.

When the TDR was longer than 80 ms, the average S-fila-
ment total length was short, because the scroll wave re-entries 
spontaneously  terminated  and  the  accompanying  filaments 
were short-lived (not shown).

Thus, the IKr-blockers, dofetilide, quinidine, vesnarinone, 
and nifekalant, did not change the relationship between the 
TDR and the average S-filament total length (Figure 5), but 
they did have different effects on TDR duration (Figures 3C 
and 3E).

Discussion

The  present  study  examined  the  role  of  TDR  in  sustained 
scroll  wave  re-entry,  and  provided  a  novel  analysis  of  the 
mechanisms underlying sustained tachyarrhythmias. We ana-
lyzed  the  filament  dynamics  to  simplify  and  quantify  the 
complex spatiotemporal activity during scroll wave re-entry. 
The major findings of the present study are:

(1) Reduced IKs enhanced the IKr block-mediated increase 

in the TDR.

(2) A mild increase in the TDR restrained the scroll wave 
breakup  and  shortened  the  total  filament  length,  whereas  a 
marked  increase  in  the  TDR  facilitated  the  scroll  wave 
breakup and increased the total filament length.

The Role of TDR in the Induction of Arrhythmia
The balance of initiation, termination, and breakup of the scroll 
waves determines the sustainment of ventricular tachyarrhyth-
mias.  The  present  study  analyzed  scroll  wave  behavior  in 
response to various TDR, with the aim of clarifying the rela-
tionship between the TDR and the maintenance of ventricu-
lar tachyarrhythmias.

It is widely accepted that the TDR or electrophysiological 
heterogeneity at the tissue level induces re-entrant arrhyth-
mias. Noda et al suggested in a clinical study that TdP might 
occur as a result of enlarged TDR, leading to the first re-entrant 
excitation in patients with congenital LQTS.23 El-Sherif et al24 
showed  that  TDR  was  linked  to  the  genesis  of  TdP  in  the 
canine LQTS model, and Kozhevnikov et al25 demonstrated 
that  dofetilide  significantly  increased  TDR  which,  in  turn, 
increased  vulnerability  to  hypertrophic  heart.  Furthermore, 
Akar et al showed that the regional distribution of M-cells 
underlies  the  re-entrant  mechanism  of  TdP  in  the  canine 
LQTS model.2

T-wave  alternans  is  known  as  a  predictor  of  arrhythmic 
events26,27 and discordant T-wave alternans is associated with 
a  greater  propensity  to  develop  ventricular  tachyarrhyth-
mias.28  Chinushi  et  al  showed  that  the  discordant  T-wave 
alternans derived from both the heterogeneous distribution of 
the diastolic interval and the regional differences in the resti-
tution properties.29 The majority of clinical and experimental 
studies  have  suggested  that  arrhythmogenesis  is  primarily 
caused by a large degree of electrophysiological heterogene-
ity or TDR that activates the TdP/VF mechanism. Similarly, 
in the 2-D simulations, Clayton and Holden reported a close 
relationship between the increase in APD dispersion and the 
initiation of re-entrant arrhythmias.30

In  contrast,  findings  reported  by  our  colleagues  numeri-
cally indicated that TDR is a predictor of drug-induced TdP, 
independent  of  APD  prolongation.13  They  suggested  that 
although early afterdepolarization, resulting from QT prolon-
gation, plays an important role in triggering repetitive activa-
tion, an increase in TDR might be an independent substrate 
for re-entry initiation, an underlying mechanism for the per-
petuation of ventricular tachyarrhythmias.13 However, in their 
study,13 the epicardial, mid-myocardial, and endocardial cell 
models13 were not assembled into a 3-D ventricular wall with 
cell-to-cell coupling. Thus, in the present study, we extended 
the cellular level simulations into the 3-D tissue level. Our 
model included appropriate cell-to-cell coupling, wall thick-
ness,  and  a  transmural  repolarization  gradient.  In  the  3-D 
ventricular wall slab model, we found that the slight increase 
in  TDR  evoked  by  mild  IKr  blockade  was  antiarrhythmic, 
because it restrained scroll wave breakup, whereas the marked 
increase in TDR evoked by moderate IKr blockade was pro-
arrhythmic because it facilitated scroll wave breakup.

Circulation Journal  Vol.75,  January  2011

86

HARAGUCHI R et al.

This  finding  suggested  that  the  induction  of  a  tachyar-
rhythmia could be separated into initiation and maintenance 
stages, and the maintenance stage should be investigated in a 
3-D model of the myocardium.

The Degree of TDR Determines Filament Dynamics
Filament  dynamics  are  directly  related  to  scroll  wave  be-
havior. Clayton and Holden revealed the details of filament 
dynamics during VF (eg, changes in the number of filaments, 
genealogical tree, distributions in length, and lifetime) in an 
anatomically-detailed simulation of canine ventricles.31

Our investigation of the relationship between TDR and QT 
interval did not reveal a one-to-one relationship (Figure 3E). 
It is widely accepted that the long QT interval with a suffi-
ciently steep APD restitution curve increases the wavefront-
wavetail  interaction,  resulting  in  scroll  wave  breakups.  In 
contrast, as shown in Figure 4 and the related supplementary 
movies, the filament bending was caused by the difference in 
APD among the endocardial, mid-myocardial, and epicardial 
layers  (ie,  TDR)  rather  than  the  longest  APD  among  the  
3 layers (ie, QT interval). Therefore, we believe that the TDR 
is an independent determining factor of scroll wave filament 
dynamics.  Furthermore,  our  findings  suggest  that  the  total 
length of the S-filament depends on the degree of the TDR, 
and that a large TDR facilitates the sustainment of re-entrant 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias.

IKs Reduction Facilitates the IKr Block-Mediated TDR  
Increase
We found that different types of IKr-blockers changed TDR 
only  when  the  IKs  was  reduced  (Figures 3C  and 3E).  This 
finding is similar to that reported by our colleagues in a cellu-
lar level simulation study. 13 IKs suppression corresponds to 
mimicking of a KCNQ1 defect, called LQT1. Additionally, 
latent LQTS and increasing TDR appear under IKs suppres-
sion.  Burashnikov  et  al  demonstrated  that  a  prominent  IKs 
was  responsible  for  the  resistance  to  the  arrhythmogenic 
effects of IKr blockade in the canine heart.32 IKs reduction in 
our simulations is within the range of LQT1 patients33 and 
our simulations are consistent with their data.32

Longer TDR Increase the Critical Mass of the Myocardium
When  TDR  was  longer  than  80.0 ms,  the  average  S-fila-
ment total length was shorter than it was at the control value 
(Figure 5).  This  might  be  explained  by  an  increase  in  the 
critical mass of the myocardium as a result of the extended 
scroll  wavelength  34,35  required  to  sustain  TdP/VF.  Scroll 
wave re-entry cannot continue to rotate spontaneously in an 
insufficient amount of myocardial tissue. The critical mass is 
then defined as the amount of myocardial mass that is inca-
pable  of  maintaining  the  self-rotated  scroll  wave.34,35  Our 
preliminary simulations revealed that at a TDR of 105.6 ms, 
the  critical  mass  of  the  myocardium  for  a  scroll  wave  re-
entry was 9.0 × 9.0 × 1.0 cm, which was larger than that used 
in our study.

Physiological and Clinical Implications
The TDR has traditionally been thought to initiate rather than 
sustain ventricular tachyarrhythmias, and the roles of the QT 
interval and the TDR in the ventricular tachyarrhythmia have 
been ambiguous. In contrast, the present study clearly demon-
strated that the TDR played a key role in the sustainment of 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias, based on scroll wave re-entries. 
We have shown that with a TDR longer than 58.3 ms, scroll 
wave  breakup,  which  is  important  for  the  maintenance  of 

ventricular  tachyarrhythmias,  is  the  result  of  both  the  frag-
mentation by filament bending and filament neogenesis by the 
wavefront-wavetail  interaction.  However,  wavefront-wave-
tail interaction was hardly observed with a TDR shorter than 
58.3 ms. Thus, we suggest that whereas the long QT interval 
might  increase  the  wavefront-wavetail  interaction,  a  large 
TDR can facilitate bending and fragmentation of filaments, 
causing scroll wave breakups.

In hypertrophied cardiac myocytes, normal transmural dis-
tribution of membrane current density has been reported to 
be  decreased,  resulting  in  T-wave  inversion.36,37  However, 
hypertrophied cardiomyocytes are susceptible to ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias. TDR should be within certain range, and 
both very small and very large TDR might be arrhythmogenic.
Our simulation results suggest that avoiding both a long 
QT interval and a large TDR is necessary to restrain inherent 
or drug-induced ventricular tachyarrhythmias at both the ini-
tiation stage and the maintenance stage leading up to tachyar-
rhythmias. Additionally, our simulation results suggest that 
the M-cell layer restrains degeneration of ventricular tachyar-
rhythmias by facilitating the transition from the S-filaments 
of scroll wave re-entries to the short-lived NS-filaments in 
the control condition.

Study Limitations
We did not consider rotational anisotropy because our prin-
cipal  goal  was  to  investigate  the  role  of  the  TDR  in  scroll 
wave behavior. From a structural point of view, we did not 
use  rugged  or  curved  tissue.  Furthermore,  we  did  not  con-
sider the anatomical features and topology (ie, septum, RV, 
and Purkinje fiber networks). In addition, a previous experi-
mental  study  suggested  a  different  distribution  of  M-cells 
within the ventricular wall.2 The scroll wave behavior in such 
anatomically-based models might be far more complex than 
in the 3-D ventricular wall slab model employed in this study. 
Despite these limitations, we believe that our major findings 
are correct. Finally, as an action potential model, we employed 
the modified Luo-Rudy dynamic model rather than the human 
ventricular model. However, the modified Luo-Rudy dynamic 
model  satisfied  the  conditions  of  transmural  heterogeneity 
by producing a physiological TDR.

Conclusions

This study suggests that the degree of the TDR might deter-
mine the sustainment of ventricular tachyarrhythmias by con-
trolling of the dynamics of the filaments accompanying scroll 
wave re-entries, and therefore provides mechanistic insight 
into the role of the TDR in ventricular arrhythmogenesis.

Acknowledgments

This  work  was  supported  by  Grant-in-Aid  for  Scientific  Research  (C) 
21500420,  (C)  21590909,  Young  Scientists  (B)  21790717,  Innovative 
Areas (22136011) and the Global COE Program from Ministry of Educa-
tion, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.

References

  1.  Roden DM. Drug-induced prolongation of the QT interval. N Engl 

J Med 2004; 350: 1013 – 1022.

  2.  Akar FG, Yan GX, Antzelevitch C, Rosenbaum DS. Unique topo-
graphical distribution of M cells underlies reentrant nechanism of 
Torsade  de  Pointes  in  the  long-QT  syndrome.  Circulation  2002; 
105: 1247 – 1253.

  3.  Akar  FG,  Rosenbaum  DS.  Transmural  electrophysiological  het-
erogeneities underlying arrhythmogenesis in heart failure. Circ Res 
2003; 93: 638 – 645.

  4.  Shimizu W, Antzelevitch C. Sodium channel block with mexiletine 

Circulation Journal  Vol.75,  January  2011

TDR Determines Scroll Wave Behavior

87

is effective in reducing dispersion of repolarization and preventing 
torsade de pointes in LQT2 and LQT3. Circulation 1997; 96: 2038 –  
2047.

  5.  Yan GX, Shimizu W, Antzelevitch C. Characteristics and distribu-
tion of M cells in arterially perfused canine left ventricular wedge 
preparations. Circulation 1998; 98: 1921 – 1927.

  6.  Belardinelli L, Antzelevitch C, Vos MA. Assessing predictors of 
drug-induced torsade de pointes. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2003; 24: 
619 – 625.

  7.  Diego  JMD,  Belardinelli  L,  Antzelevitch  C.  Cisapride-induced 
transural dispersion of repolarization and torsade de pointes in the 
canine left ventricular wedge preparation during epicardial stimu-
lation. Circulation 2003; 108: 1027 – 1033.

  8.  Ashihara T, Suzuki T, Namba T, Inagaki M, Ikeda T, Ito M, et al. 
Simulated electrocardiogram of spiral wave reentry in a mathemati-
cal ventricular model. In: Yamaguchi T, editor. Clinical application 
of computational mechanics to the cardiovascular system. Tokyo: 
Springer-Verlag, 2000; 205 – 216.

  9.  Nakazawa K, Suzuki T, Ashihara T, Inagaki M, Namba T, Ikeda T, 
et al. Computational analysis and visualization of spiral wave reen-
try in a virtual heart model. In: Yamaguchi T, editor. Clinical appli-
cation  of  computational  mechanics  to  the  cardiovascular  system. 
Tokyo: Springer-Verlag, 2000; 217 – 241.

10.  Winfree AT. Electrical turbulence in three-dimensional heart mus-

cle. Science 1994; 266: 1003 – 1006.

11.  Faber GM, Rudy Y. Action potential and contractility changes in 
[Na+]i overloaded cardaic myocytes: A simulation study. Biophys J 
2000; 78: 2392 – 2404.

12.  Findlay I, Suzuki S, Murakami S, Kurachi Y. Physiological modula-
tion of voltage-dependent inactivation in the cardiac muscle L-type 
calcium channel: A modeling study. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 2008; 
96: 482 – 498.

13.  Suzuki S, Murakami S, Tsujimae K, Findlay I, Kurachi Y. In silico 
risk assessment for drug-induction of cardiac arrhythmia. Prog in 
Biophys Mol Biol 2008; 98: 52 – 60.

14.  Hosaka Y, Iwata M, Kamiya N, Yamada M, Kinoshita K, Fukunishi 
Y, et al. Mutational analysis of block and facilitation of HERG cur-
rent by a class III anti-arrhythmic agent, nifekalant. Channels 2007; 
1: 198 – 208.

15.  Suzuki T, Ashihara T, Inagaki M, Namba T, Ikeda T, Nakazawa K. 
A high-performance computation method for simulation of cardiac 
excitation  propagation  using  a  supercomputer.  In:  Yamaguchi  T, 
editor. Clinical application of computational mechanics to the car-
diovascular system. Tokyo: Springer-Verlag, 2000; 193 – 204.

16.  Suzuki T, Inagaki M, Toda T, Yao T, Namba T, Suzuki R, et al. 
How M cell affects to the polarity of T waves: A computer simu-
lation of the transmural distribution of APD in the ventricle wall. 
IEICE Tech Rep 2001; 101: 21 – 28.

17.  Ashihara T, Namba T, Ikeda T, Ito M, Kinoshita M, Nakazawa K. 
Breakthrough waves during ventricular fibrillation depend on the 
degree of rotational anisotropy and the boundary conditions: A sim-
ulation study. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2001; 12: 312 – 322.

18.  Kadish A, Shinnar M, Moore EN, Levine JH, Balke CW, Spear JF. 
Interaction of fiber orientation and direction of impulse propagation 
with anatomic barriers in anisotropic canine myocardium. Circula-
tion 1988; 78: 1478 – 1494.

19.  Saffitz JE, Yamada KA. Gap junction distribution in the heart. In: 
Zipes DP, Jalife J, editors. Cardiac electrophysiology: From cell to 
bedside, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2000; 179 – 187.

20.  Rodríguez B, Li L, Eason JC, Efimov IR, Trayanova NA. Differ-
ences between left and right ventricular chamber geometry affect 
cardiac vulnerability to electric shocks. Circ Res 2005; 97: 168 – 175.
21.  Larson  C,  Dragnev  L,  Trayanova  N.  Analysis  of  electrically  in-
duced reentrant circuits in a sheet of myocardium. Ann Biomed Eng 
2003; 31: 768 – 780.

22.  Iyer  AN,  Gray  RA.  An  experimentalist’s  approach  to  accurate 
localization of phase singularities during reentry. Ann Biomed Eng 
2001; 29: 47 – 59.

23.  Noda T, Shimizu W, Satomi K, Suyama K, Kurita T, Aihara N, et 
al. Classification and mechanism of torsade de pointes initiation in 
patients  with  congenital  long  QT  syndrome.  Euro  Heart  J  2004; 
25: 2149 – 2154.

24.  El-Sherif N, Caref EB, Yin H, Restivo M. The electrophysiological 
mechanism  of  ventricular  arrhythmias  in  the  long  QT  syndrome: 
Tridimensional mapping of activation and recovery patterns. Circ 
Res 1996; 79: 474 – 492.

25.  Kozhevnikov DO, Yamamoto K, Robotis D, Restivo M, El-Sherif 
N.  Electrophysiological  mechanism  of  enhanced  susceptibility  of 
hypertrophied heart to aquired torsade de pointes arrhythmias. Cir-
culation 2002; 105: 1128 – 1134.

26.  Kim JW, Pak HN, Park JH, Nam GB, Kim SK, Lee HS, et al. Defi-
billator electrogram T wave alternans as a predictor of spontaneous 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias in defibrillator recipients. Circ J 2009; 
73: 55 – 62.

27.  Maeda  S,  Nishizaki  M,  Yamawake  N,  Ashikaga  T,  Shimada  H, 
Asano M, et al. Ambulatory ECG-based T-wave alternans and heart 
rate  turbulence  predict  high  risk  of  arrhythmic  events  in  patients 
with old myocardial infarction. Circ J 2009; 73: 2223 – 2228.

28.  Chinushi M, Restivo M, Caref EB, El-Sherif N. Electrophysiologi-
cal basis of arrhythmogenecity of QT/T alternans in the long-QT 
syndrome: Tridimensional analysis of the kinetics of cardiac repo-
larization. Circ Res 1998; 83: 614 – 628.

29.  Chinushi M, Kozhevnikov D, Caref EB, Restivo M, El-Sherif N. 
Mechanism  of  discordant  T  wave  alternans  in  the  in  vivo  heart.  
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2003; 14: 632 – 638.

30.  Clayton  RH,  Holden  AV.  Dispersion  of  cardiac  action  potential 
duration  and  the  initiation  of  re-entry:  A  computational  study. 
Biomed Eng Online 2005; 4: 11.

31.  Clayton  RH,  Holden  AV.  Filament  behavior  in  a  computational 
model  of  ventricular  fibrillation  in  the  canine  heart.  IEEE  Trans 
Biomed Eng 2004; 51: 28 – 34.

32.  Burashnikov A, Antzelevitch C. Prominent IKs in epicardium and 
endocardium contributes to development of transmural dispersion 
of repolarization but protects against development of early afterde-
polarizations. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2002; 13: 172 – 177.

33.  Viswanathan  PC,  Rudy  Y.  Pause  induced  early  afterdepolariza-
tions in the long QT syndrome: A simulation study. Circ Res 1999; 
42: 530 – 542.

34.  Zipes DP, Fischer J, King RM, Nicoll AD, Jolly WW. Termination 
of ventricular fibrillation in dogs by depolarizing a critical amount 
of myocardium. Am J Cardiol 1975; 36: 37 – 44.

35.  Kim YH, Garfinkel A, Ikeda T, Wu TJ, Athill CA, Weiss NW, et 
al. Spatioteporal complexity of ventricular fibrillation revealed by 
tissue mass reduction in isolated swine right ventricle. J Clin Invest 
1997; 100: 2486 – 2500.

36.  Bryant  SM,  Shipsey  SJ,  Hart  G.  Normal  regional  distribution  of 
membrane current density in rat left ventricle is altered in catechol-
amine-induced hypertrophy. Cardiovasc Res 1999; 42: 391 – 401.
37.  Rozanski GJ, Xu Z, Zhang K, Patel KP. Altered K+ current of ven-
tricular myocytes in rats with chronic myocardial infarction. Am J 
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 1998; 274: 259 – 265.

Appendix 1

Integration of 4 Representative Types of IKr-Blockade
To  integrate  4  representative  types  of  IKr-blockade,  we  modified  IKr 
currents as follows:13

IKr = y · GKr · Xr · R · (V – EKr),

where y is the fraction of IKr that is not blocked, GKr is the maximum 
conductance  of  IKr,  Xr  is  the  time-dependent  activation  gate,  R  is  the 
time-independent  inactivation  gate,  V  is  the  membrane  potential,  and 
EKr is the reversal potential.

ydepolarization  represents  IKr  amplitude.13  The  dofetilide-induced  block-
ade is voltage- and time-independent and the y is constant and is equal 
to ydepolarization.13

The quinidine-induced blockade is fast-voltage- and time-dependent. 

The y is calculated by the following first order differential equation:13

dy
dt

=

(y∞–y)
τ ,

where y∞ is the steady-state value of the fraction of IKr that is not blocked 
by quinidine-type drug, and τ is the time-constant for y.

The unbinding rate constant (α) and the binding rate constant (β) are 
obtained from experimental data.13 The steady-state value of y (y∞) and 
the time-constant for y (τ) are expressed as follows:

y∞ = 

α
α+β
1

,

=τ

α+β ,

α= 0.5716+0.7522·exp(0.05094·V)

β= 0.7522·exp(0.05094·V)

1

ydepolarization

–1

,

Circulation Journal  Vol.75,  January  2011

88

HARAGUCHI R et al.

where ydepolarization is the limit set for the minimum of unblocked IKr in the 
presence of quinidine.

The vesnarinone-induced blockade is slow-voltage- and time-depen-

dent as follows:13

α=0.5

β=

0.5·

1

ydepolarization

–1

1+ exp

–(V+16.5)

12.6

.

The  nifekalant-induced  blockade  is  voltage-  and  time-independent, 
and is similar to dofetilide-induced blockade. The y is constant and is 
equal  to  ydepolarization.  The  nifekalant-induced  blockade  was  simulated 
using  a  steady-state  activation  curve  of  IKr  kinetics  shifted  positively 
20 mV, as reported by Hosaka et al:14

Xr∞ = 1/{1 + exp[–(V + 41.5)/7.5]},

where Xr∞ is the steady-state value of the IKr activation gate.

Appendix 2

Methods to Measure TDR, QT Interval, and Filament Length
We defined the depolarization time in each myocardial unit as the time 

when the membrane potential go above –75 mV, and the repolarization 
time as the time when the membrane potential go below –75 mV. Then, 
the  APD  was  defined  as  the  interval  between  the  depolarization  time 
and the repolarization time in each myocardial unit. Further, the TDR 
was defined as the interval between the earliest repolarization and the 
last repolarization in the 1-D model,13 and the QT interval was defined 
as the interval between the earliest depolarization and the last repolar-
ization (refer Figure 1D).13

The  scroll  wave  filaments  were  expressed  as  a  continuum  of  phase 
singularities, defined as spatial points where all phase values converged 
in a phase map.21,22 We counted the number of units detected as the fila-
ment locations and considered the number as a filament length.

Supplementary files

Movie 1.    The scroll wave behavior and filament dynamics correspond-
ing to Figure 4A.
Movie 2.    The scroll wave behavior and filament dynamics correspond-
ing to Figure 4B.
Movie 3.    The scroll wave behavior and filament dynamics correspond-
ing to Figure 4C.
Please find supplementary file(s);
http://dx.doi.org/10.1253/circj.CJ-10-0071

Circulation Journal  Vol.75,  January  2011

