Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 285: E138–E154, 2003.
First published March 18, 2003; 10.1152/ajpendo.00194.2002.

Modeling of Ca2⫹ ﬂux in pancreatic ␤-cells: role of the
plasma membrane and intracellular stores

Leonid E. Fridlyand, Natalia Tamarina, and Louis H. Philipson
Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637

Submitted 6 May 2002; accepted in ﬁnal form 7 March 2003

Fridlyand, Leonid E., Natalia Tamarina, and Louis
H. Philipson. Modeling of Ca2⫹ ﬂux in pancreatic ␤-cells:
role of the plasma membrane and intracellular stores. Am J
Physiol Endocrinol Metab 285: E138–E154, 2003. First pub-
lished March 18, 2003; 10.1152/ajpendo.00194.2002.—We
have developed a detailed mathematical model of ionic ﬂux in
␤-cells that includes the most essential channels and pumps
in the plasma membrane. This model is coupled to equations
describing Ca2⫹, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), ATP, and
Na⫹ homeostasis, including the uptake and release of Ca2⫹
by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In our model, metaboli-
cally derived ATP activates inward Ca2⫹ ﬂux by regulation of
ATP-sensitive K⫹ channels and depolarization of the plasma
membrane. Results from the simulations support the hypoth-
esis that intracellular Na⫹ and Ca2⫹ in the ER can be the
main variables driving both fast (2–7 osc/min) and slow
intracellular Ca2⫹ concentration oscillations (0.3–0.9 osc/
min) and that the effect of IP3 on Ca2⫹ leak from the ER
contributes to the pattern of slow calcium oscillations. Sim-
ulations also show that ﬁlling the ER Ca2⫹ stores leads to
faster electrical bursting and Ca2⫹ oscillations. Speciﬁc Ca2⫹
oscillations in isolated ␤-cell lines can also be simulated.
Ca2⫹ oscillations; endoplasmic reticulum; pancreatic islets;
theoretical model

A RISE in the intracellular free calcium concentration
([Ca2⫹]i) is a key signal in the initiation of insulin
secretion from the pancreatic ␤-cell. This increase prin-
cipally results from calcium inﬂux through plasma
membrane (PM) Ca2⫹ channels, which open in re-
sponse to secretagogues, primarily glucose. The metab-
olism of glucose through glycolysis and the tricarboxy-
lic acid cycle leads to an increase in the cytoplasmic
ATP-to-ADP (ATP/ADP) ratio. This causes closure of
ATP-sensitive K⫹ (KATP) channels followed by depolar-
ization of the ␤-cell membrane to the threshold poten-
tial where Ca2⫹ channels open, initiating Ca2⫹ inﬂux
(4). These events underlie glucose-induced electrical
activity that, in pancreatic islets, consists of Ca2⫹-
dependent action potentials.

There is extensive literature describing ␤-cell elec-
trical activity and its relationship to [Ca2⫹]i in intact
islets of Langerhans, isolated islet cells, and insuli-
noma cell lines. Most of the work has been carried out
using mouse islets, with some studies using islets from
rat, hamster, human, and other species.

Mouse pancreatic ␤-cells exhibit complex and cyclic
spike-burst activity in response to a rise in extracellu-
lar glucose concentration. The bursts consist of a depo-
larized phase of Ca2⫹-carrying action potentials alter-
nating with a silent phase of repolarization, resulting
in oscillations in intracellular Ca2⫹, which can drive
pulses of insulin secretion (28, 37).

The only stimulus required for a complex cyclic
spike-burst activity and corresponding [Ca2⫹]i oscilla-
tions in islets and ␤-cell clusters is elevation of glucose
to levels above 5 and less than ⬃20 mM. Intermediate
glucose concentrations induce two main types of oscil-
lations in mouse pancreatic islets: fast, where the pe-
riod ranges from 10 to 30 s, and slow, with periods of
several minutes (37, 54, 83). Single mouse ␤-cells can
also respond to glucose stimulation with regular oscil-
lations (37).

We have previously studied slow and fast [Ca2⫹]i
oscillations in islets in response to a variety of con-
ditions (70, 73; unpublished observations). We have
also previously reported that a stable, transgenically
derived murine insulinoma cell line (␤TC3-neo) re-
sponds to glucose with slow, large amplitude [Ca2⫹]i
oscillations but only in the presence of 10–20 mM
tetraethylammonium (TEA), a blocker of K⫹ chan-
nels (74). We have utilized this cell line to charac-
terize glucose-stimulated oscillatory activity (74).

However, the precise interpretation of previous re-
sults is limited due to the numerous channels and
pumps in ␤-cells that work concurrently, and identiﬁ-
cation of physiologically slow variables that drive os-
cillations remains unclear. To clarify these complex
experimental results, we used a mathematical model-
ing approach. Our goals, then, are twofold: to develop a
model for ␤-cell ion homeostasis, including the bursts
and [Ca2⫹]i oscillations that can simulate cellular be-
havior, and to explain on this basis the experimental
data for single cells and islets.

Several mathematical approaches in the literature
have provided quantitative estimates of glucose-in-
duced insulin secretion with corresponding descrip-
tions of glucose transport, metabolism, and ion regula-
tion (most recent are Refs. 6, 7, 13, 14, 26, 30, 62, 65,
and 78). Many phenomena were successfully explained
using these models (see DISCUSSION). However, most

Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: L. H. Philip-
son, Dept. of Medicine, MC 1027, Univ. of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland
Ave, Chicago, IL 60637 (E-mail: L-philipson@uchicago.edu).

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby
marked ‘‘advertisement’’ in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734
solely to indicate this fact.

E138

0193-1849/03 $5.00 Copyright © 2003 the American Physiological Society

http://www.ajpendo.org

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

E139

models described one speciﬁc phenomenon and there-
fore included a very restricted set of channels and
pumps, so that it is difﬁcult to apply these models to
another aim. In addition, newly described experimen-
tal results and signaling molecules should be consid-
ered.

For this reason, we developed a new model to con-
sider an extended variety of ionic channels and pumps
as well as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) calcium seques-
tration mechanisms that have been identiﬁed in
␤-cells. We simulated whole cell electrical activity and
[Ca2⫹]i, free calcium in the ER ([Ca2⫹]ER), intracellular
Na⫹ ([Na⫹]i), cytosolic ATP ([ATP]i), and inositol 1,4,5-
trisphosphate ([IP3]i) concentrations by use of param-
eters derived mainly for mouse ␤-cells. However, in
this article, we do not make special consideration of
metabolic processes or insulin secretion.

To our knowledge, this article represents the ﬁrst
attempt to include in one model the key ion channels
and pumps on both the PM and the ER membrane.
Several detailed and comprehensive models have been
developed for cardiac muscle and other cell types (67,
71). Here, we employ this approach to investigate the
possible role of K⫹ channels, Na⫹, and IP3 in regulat-
ing ␤-cell Ca2⫹ oscillations.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Islet Isolation and [Ca2⫹]i Measurement

Isolation of rodent islets. Islets of Langerhans were iso-
lated from the pancreata of 8- to 10-wk-old C57BL/6J mice by
collagenase digestion and discontinuous Ficoll gradient
methods described previously (85).

Measurement of [Ca2⫹]i. Islets were loaded with fura 2 for
25 min at 37°C in growth medium (RPMI 1640–10% fetal calf
serum, penicillin, and streptomycin) supplemented with 5
mM acetoxymethyl ester of fura 2 (Molecular Probes). [Ca2⫹]i
was estimated as described elsewhere (74). Dual-wavelength
digitized video ﬂuorescent microscopy with fura 2 in single
islets was performed using an intensiﬁed charge-coupled
device (Hammatsu C2400) and Metaﬂuor imaging software
(Universal Imaging).

Model Development

Our model of the ␤-cell combines a parallel conductance
membrane model and an inside ﬂuid compartmental model
(Fig. 1). The compartmental model describes the time rate of
changes in [Ca2⫹]i, [Ca2⫹]ER, [Na⫹]i, and [ATP]i, and [IP3]i.
The extracellular space is assumed to have a relatively large
volume, so that ionic concentrations of Ca2⫹, Na⫹, and K⫹
there are assumed to be constant.

The corresponding equations for particular channels or
pumps that we found in the literature were used even though
they were in some cases obtained from cells other than
pancreatic ␤-cells. However, we have considered the origin of
the equations employed and their correspondence to biologi-
cal processes. Model coefﬁcients from the literature were
adjusted to simulate the corresponding experimental data as
indicated. The basic set of evaluated coefﬁcients is shown in
Table 1, denoted as “standard.”

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of currents and ion ﬂuxes through
the plasma membrane (PM) and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) mem-
brane that have been included in the whole ␤-cell model. Top: PM
currents: IVCa, voltage-dependent Ca2⫹ current; ICa,pump, calcium
pump current; INa,Ca, Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchange current; ICRAN, Ca2⫹ re-
lease-activated nonselective cation current; INa, inward Na⫹ cur-
rents; INa,K, Na/K pump current; IKDr, delayed rectifying K⫹ current;
IKCa, voltage-independent small-conductance Ca2⫹-activated K⫹ cur-
rent; IKATP, ATP-sensitive K⫹ (KATP) current; ksg, coefﬁcient of the
sequestration rate of intracellular free Ca⫹ concentration ([Ca2⫹]i)
by the secretory granules; Jer,p, uptake of Ca2⫹ by the ER; Jout, Ca2⫹
leak current from the ER; IP3, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate.

Plasma membrane currents. The differential equation de-
scribing time-dependent changes in the plasma membrane
potential (V) is the current balance equation (41)

⫺Cm

dV
dt

⫽ IVCa ⫹ ICa,pump ⫹ INa,Ca ⫹ ICRAN ⫹ INa

(1)

⫹ INa,K ⫹ IKDr ⫹ IKCa ⫹ IKATP

where Cm is the total membrane capacitance. Model currents
include a voltage-dependent Ca2⫹ current (IVCa), a PM cal-
cium pump current (ICa,pump), Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchange current
(INa,Ca), Ca2⫹ release-activated nonselective cation current
(ICRAN), inward Na⫹ currents (INa), a Na⫹/K⫹ pump current
(INa,K), a delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ current (IKDr), voltage-indepen-
dent small conductance Ca2⫹-activated K⫹ current (IKCa),
and the KATP current (IKATP) (Fig. 1).

Ionic ﬂux across the membrane, Jxi, is related to the ionic

current by the expression

Jxi ⫽

Ixi
zxF

(2)

where F and zx, are Faraday’s constant and ionic charge,
respectively.

General current equation. The ionic current across chan-

nels may be given by the empirical equation (41, p.18)

where

Ixi ⫽ gXi共V ⫺ Vx兲

VX ⫽

RT
zxF

ln

关X兴o
关X兴i

X ⫽ Ca2 ⫹ , K ⫹ , Na ⫹

(3)

(4)

(5)

and where gXi is the whole cell conductance, VX is the equi-
librium potential, R is the universal gas constant, T is abso-
lute temperature, and Xo and Xi are the extra- and intracel-
lular concentrations, respectively.

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

E140

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

Table 1. Standard parameter values

where

Current and Parameters

Symbol

Value

Units

IVCa

ICa,pump

INa,Ca

ICRAN

INa

INa,K

IKDr

IKCa

IKATP

770 pS
⫺19.0 mV
9.5 mV

2,000 fA
0.1 ␮M

271 pS
0.75 ␮M

0.7 pS/mV

0 mV
200 ␮M

1,200 pS

600 fA

3,000 pS

130 pS
0.1 ␮M

PmCap
KCap

gNaCa
KNaCa

gmNa

PNaK

g⬘mKDr

gmKCa
KKCa

gmVCa
Maximum conductance
Half-activation potential
VCah
Slope at half-maximum potential KCah

Maximum current
Half-maximal pump activity

Maximum conductance
Ca2⫹ afﬁnity constant

Maximum conductance coefﬁcient gmCRAN
Reversal potential
VCRAN
Half-activation [Ca2⫹]ER level
KCar

Maximum conductance

Current coefﬁcient

Maximum conductance

Maximum conductance
Afﬁnity constant

Maximum conductance

Jer,p (SERCA)

Maximum rate of pumping
Half-maximal pump activity

IP3 metabolism

g⬘mKATP

24,000 pS

PCaER
KCarp

0.105 ␮M/ms

0.5 ␮M

Rate constant of IP3 production
kIP
Rate constant of IP3 degradation kdIP
Half-activation [Ca2⫹]i

KIPCa

0.0003 ␮M/ms
0.00004 ms⫺1

0.4 ␮M

Jout, CaER

2⫹ leak ﬂux

Ca2⫹ leak permeability out of the

ER
2⫹ maximum permeability
CaER
through open IP3-activated
channels

Afﬁnity constant of [Ca2⫹]i to

Pleak

0.0001 pl/ms

PIP3

0.0012 pl/ms

IP3R

KRCa
Afﬁnity constant of [IP3]i to IP3R KIP3
Coefﬁcient of the Ca2⫹

sequestration rate

ATP homeostasis

ksg

Concentration of intracellular

nucleotides

[A]o
Rate constant of ATP production kADP
Rate constant of Ca2⫹-dependent

ATP consumption

Rate constant of permanent ATP

kATP,Ca

0.077 ␮M
3.2 ␮M

0.0001 ms⫺1

4,000 ␮M

adjusted ms⫺1

0.00005 ␮M⫺1ms⫺1

consumption

kATP

0.00005 ms⫺1

CRAN, Ca2⫹ release-activated nonselective cation; SERCA, sarco-
(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2⫹-ATPase; IP3, inositol 1,4,5-triphos-
phate; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; IP3R, IP3 receptor. For other
deﬁnitions and explanations see text.

Whole cell conductance may depend on ion concentrations
and voltage. These dependencies will be speciﬁed for each
conductance as they are discussed.

IVCa. The whole cell Ca2⫹ current in mouse ␤-cells ﬂows
principally through voltage-activated Ca2⫹ channels (29, 80).
This current increases when the membrane is depolarized.
Equation 3 was used for this current. The current/voltage
relationship of this current [pVCa(V)] can be described by a
Boltzmann-type activation curve (7, 9). Then

IVCa ⫽ gmVCapVCa共V兲共V ⫺ VCa兲

(6)

pVCa共V兲 ⫽

1

1 ⫹ exp关共VCah ⫺ V兲/KCah兴

(7)

and where gmVCa is the maximum whole cell conductance,
VCah is the half-activation potential, and KCah is the slope at
half-maximal potential.

At physiological Ca2⫹ concentrations, the measured VCah
varies from ⫺3.8 mV (80) and ⫺16.7 mV (45) to ⫺19 mV (9),
and KCah extends from 6.6 mV (45) and 8.4 mV (80) to 13 mV
(9). In our model, these coefﬁcients were ﬁtted to be inside
these regions (Table 1).

According to Go¨pel et al. (33) the mean integrated Ca2⫹
current observed during a 100-ms depolarization to ⫺20 mV
in the ␤-cell in situ was 7.7 pC at [Ca2⫹]o ⫽ 2.6 mM. This
result can be obtained from Eq. 6 of our model, with gmVCa ⫽
995 pS and [Ca2⫹]i ⫽ 0.05 ␮M. We set gmVCa ⫽ 770 pS as the
standard condition for our model (Table 1). This value is close
to that estimated above. The current/voltage relationship
calculated using Eq. 6 is in good correlation with data for
␤-cells in situ (33).

PM Ca2⫹ pumps (ICa,pump). PM Ca2⫹ pumps are now well
recognized as a primary system for the speciﬁc expulsion of
Ca2⫹ from ␤-cells (87). However, their kinetic properties are
not well studied in these cells. For this reason, the general
properties of PM Ca2⫹ pumps were used for the calculations.
It is now generally established that the Ca2⫹/ATP stoichi-
ometry of the PM Ca2⫹ pump is 1 (10, 66) and that the
reconstituted PM pumps are capable of establishing a mem-
brane potential while operating with H⫹/Ca2⫹ ⫽ 1 (40). PM
and ER Ca2⫹ pumps do not have the sensitivity to ATP at the
millimolar ATP concentrations that exist in physiological
conditions (10). The Km is ⬍0.5 ␮M Ca2⫹ for activated PM
pumps (10, 66). On the basis of these data, the Ca2⫹ current
through PM Ca2⫹ pumps was expressed in our model as (see
62)

ICa,pump ⫽ PmCap

关Ca2⫹]i
2

KCap

2 ⫹ 关Ca2⫹]i
2

(8)

where PmCap is a maximum current and KCap is the value for
the half-activation calcium concentration. KCap was set to 0.1
␮M, which is within the range of experimental observations
for other preparations. PmCap (Table 1) is correspondingly
above the evaluated lower limit (830 fA) that we obtained
(see RESULTS).

Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger (INa,Ca). The lack of speciﬁc inhibi-
tors hinders the experimental assessment of the role of the
Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger. However, a detailed investigation of
the ␤-cell electrogenic 3 Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger was recently
reported (25), and the exchanger current (INa,Ca) was taken
as follows from this work

INa,Ca ⫽ gNaCa

关Ca2⫹]i
5

关Ca2⫹]i

5 ⫹ KNaCa

5

共V ⫺ VNa,Ca兲

(9)

where

冉3 ln

RT
F

关Na⫹]o
关Na⫹]i

⫺ ln

冊

关Ca2⫹]o
关Ca2⫹]i

VNa,Ca ⫽

(10)

and where gNaCa is the maximum whole cell conductance,
and KNaCa is afﬁnity constant.

One can calculate from Gall et al. (25) that gNaCa ⫽ 271 pS
(as Cm 䡠 g˘ Na/Ca from their Eq. 2), and we used this value for
gNaCa in our model.

Similarly, those authors found KNaCa to be 1.5 ␮M (25).
However, an insigniﬁcant INa,Ca and a correspondingly very

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

E141

small inﬂuence of the Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger on the model
solutions were obtained at KNaCa ⫽ 1.5 ␮M. This result does
not correspond to the data involving the effect of this ex-
changer on glucose-induced electrical activity in intact pan-
creatic islets (25). This apparent contradiction is probably
due to the use of low ATP concentration in the perforated
patch whole cell experiments in Ref. 25; therefore, KNaCa (1.5
␮M) should only be considered as an upper limit. Data from
different cell types show that ATP induces a dramatic in-
crease in the intracellular Ca2⫹ afﬁnity for the Na⫹/Ca2⫹
exchanger (20). Correspondingly, a lower value for KNaCa
(0.75 ␮M) was employed in our model to ﬁt glucose-induced
␤-cell oscillation patterns at an increased ATP content.

ICRAN. ICRAN is a nonselective cation current whose con-
ductance is regulated by the ER Ca2⫹ content. In mouse
␤-cells, it could be activated either indirectly by ER Ca2⫹
store depletion or directly by maitotoxin (84, 88, 89). How-
ever, the mechanism for coupling ER Ca2⫹ store depletion
with CRAN remains an unresolved question.

In our model, only Na⫹ can penetrate into the cell via this
channel, reﬂecting experimental results under physiological
concentrations of cations (52, 84, 88). The current/voltage
relationship of this current [pCRAN(V)] was roughly linear,
with a reversal potential close to 0 mV (52, 84, 88). In
previous models, it was suggested that the regulation of
ICRAN depends on [Ca2⫹]ER (8, 14, 62). We take this depen-
dence following Ref. 62. Equation 3 can be written for this
Na⫹ inward current

kinetic properties have not been studied in ␤-cells. For this
reason, we employed the general model (12) as was done
previously for ␤-cells (65) (see APPENDIX A).

IKDr. The principal type of voltage-dependent K⫹ current
in ␤-cells is the IKDr. Kv2.1 is a likely candidate for the
principal delayed rectiﬁer isoform expressed in ␤-cells
(56, 70).

Equation 3 was used; however, the formulation (26, 78) is

employed for whole cell conductance.

IKDr ⫽ g⬘mKDrn共V ⫺ VK兲

(16)
where g⬘mKDr is the maximal whole cell conductance, and n
is the general gating variable, which is determined in
APPENDIX B.

The value of g⬘mKDr (Eq. 16) is calculated to be 3,000 pS for
standard conditions. This is comparable to the value used in
Refs. 8, 26, and 65.

Family of KCa channels (IKCa). The voltage-independent
small-conductance Ca2⫹-activated K⫹ channels (SK chan-
nels) are also expressed in ␤-cells (unpublished observa-
tions). It is quite plausible that these channels play an
important role in [Ca2⫹]i oscillations (32).

Equation 3 was used for this channel. Ca2⫹ activates IKCa
currents [f(Ca2⫹)] in a sigmoidal fashion (49, 53). However,
there are no data on the exact dependence in ␤-cells. The Hill
equation was used to model this relationship, where the Hill
coefﬁcient equals 3 (14) or 5 (62). We also use a Hill equation,
but with a Hill coefﬁcient equal to 4

ICRAN ⫽ fCRANpCRAN共V兲共V ⫺ VNa兲

where

fCRAN ⫽

⫺gmCRAN

1 ⫹ exp兵共关Ca2 ⫹ 兴ER ⫺ KCar兲/3其
pCRAN共V兲 ⫽ V ⫺ VCRAN

(11)

(12)

(13)

and gmCRAN is the maximum whole cell conductance, fCRAN is
the voltage-independent part of the current, KCar is the
half-activation [Ca2⫹]ER level, and VCRAN is the reversal
potential.

KCar has been modiﬁed in our model, and it is now 200
rather than 40 ␮M (as accepted in Ref. 62), because the
[Ca2⫹]ER is usually found to be in the hundred micromolar
range (see Ref. 86).

INa. The general equation for INa is derived from Eq. 3. The
relationship between conditioning voltage and relative cur-
rent amplitude for tetrodotoxin-blockable component of the
INa [pNa(V)] was characterized (33) as the Boltzmann equa-
tion. Then

IKCa ⫽ gmKCaf共Ca2⫹)(V⫺VK兲

where

f共Ca2⫹兲 ⫽

关Ca2⫹]i
4

关Ca2⫹]i

4 ⫹ KKCa

4

(17)

(18)

and KKCa is afﬁnity constant.

KKCa varies in the 0.05–0.9 ␮M range (Ref. 41, p. 144).
However, SK3 channels may be the predominant SK family
member in ␤-cells (unpublished observations), and because
KKCa ⫽ 0.1 ␮M was found for SK3 channels by Carignani et
al. (11), this value was used in our model.

It is unlikely that the large-conductance Ca2⫹-activated
K⫹ channel (BK channel) encoded by the slo gene plays an
important role in the generation of oscillatory activity in
␤-cells (50), although several previous models of ␤-cell burst-
ing have included this channel (78). We therefore did not
include it in our considerations.

KATP channels (IKATP). Equation 3 was used for this chan-
nel. However, we adopt here a kinetic model for the value of
whole cell conductance (see Refs. 43, 58, 65). Then

where

INa ⫽ gmNapNa共V兲共V ⫺ VNa兲

pNa共V兲 ⫽

1

1 ⫹ exp关共104 ⫹ V兲/8兴

(14)

(15)

The maximum value of whole cell conductance (gmNa) was
evaluated from the data (33), where it was found that INa ⫽
⫺392 pA at V ⫽ ⫺140 mV. This INa value can be obtained
from Eq. 14, with gmNa as 1,200 pS when [Na⫹]i is close to 0
and [Na⫹]o ⫽ 140 mM. (We used [Na⫹]i ⫽ 0.1 mM for this
calculation). This value was used for standard conditions
(Table 1).

Na⫹-K⫹ active transport (INa,K). Electrogenic Na⫹-K⫹-
ATPase extrudes three Na⫹ ions in exchange for two K⫹ ions
for each molecule of ATP hydrolyzed, generating a net out-
ward ﬂow of cations through the ␤-cell PM (68). However, its

IKATP ⫽ g⬘mKATPOKATP共V ⫺ VK兲

(19)
where g⬘mKATP is the maximal value of the whole cell con-
ductance, and OKATP is the fraction of channels open, which
is considered in APPENDIX C.

The value g⬘mKATP was evaluated to be 24 nS for the
standard coefﬁcient, which is comparable to the value used in
Refs. 59 and 65. Then it can be calculated from Eqs. 19 and
C1 (APPENDIX C) that the value of the whole cell conductance
(g⬘mKATP OKATP) is 0.94 nS at [ATP]i ⫽ 0. This value falls in
the range between 0.2 and 3.0 nS that was measured for the
maximum KATP conductance reported for single mouse
␤-cells (48).
Fluid Compartmental Model

The material balance equation for calcium depends on

three processes: entry, extrusion, and buffering (Fig. 1).

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

E142

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

Calcium enters the ␤-cells primarily through voltage-acti-
vated Ca2⫹ channels by diffusion along an inwardly directed
electrochemical gradient (IVCa). The maintenance of this
ionic gradient depends on a Ca2⫹-extruding mechanism in
the PM and Ca2⫹ sequestration by intracellular organelles.
At the PM, three processes are involved in transporting Ca2⫹
out of the cell: a Ca2⫹ pump, a Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger, and
removal of Ca2⫹ sequestrated in insulin granules by exocy-
tosis. In addition, both the ER and mitochondria can accu-
mulate Ca2⫹ via pumps. Even though Ca2⫹ is critical for
mitochondrial function, for the present we do not include
mitochondrial Ca2⫹ stores, since it appears that both the
volume of mitochondria and its Ca2⫹ concentration are small
relative to the ER (2, 18).

Sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2⫹-ATPase pump. Up-
take of Ca2⫹ into the ER is mediated in ␤-cells by sarco(en-
do)plasmic reticulum Ca2⫹-ATPases (SERCAs) with an un-
usually low value for the half-activation calcium concentra-
tion (ⱕ0.4 ␮M) (27). The Ca2⫹/ATP stoichiometry of the
SERCA is 2 (10, 66). The equation for SERCA was written in
the same form as the Ca2⫹ PM pump (Eq. 8; see also Ref. 62)

Jer,p ⫽ PCaER

关Ca2⫹]i
2

关Ca2⫹]i

2 ⫹ KCarp

2

(20)

where Jer,p is the ﬂux into the ER through SERCA pumps per
cytosol volume, KCarp is the half-maximal pump activity, and
PCaER is the maximum rate of pumping. The lower limit for
this parameter was evaluated (see RESULTS) as PCaER ⫽ 0.026
␮M/ms for the data from Ref. 25. The evaluated parameter
for standard conditions (Table 1) is correspondingly above
this lower limit. KCarp was taken as 0.5 ␮M, a value close to
experimental data (27).

IP3 metabolism. In the pancreatic ␤-cell, there is clear
evidence that IP3 is an important cellular messenger induc-
ing Ca2⫹ mobilization from intracellular stores by binding to
speciﬁc receptors located on intracellular Ca2⫹ stores and is
the main calcium release channel from the ER in ␤-cell
tissues (38). However, we could not ﬁnd any mathematical
models of ␤-cell regulation that used IP3 as an independent
variable.

Different mechanisms seem to be available in the ␤-cells
for stimulating IP3 production; however, only the modulation
of inositol lipid-speciﬁc phospholipase activity by changes in
Ca2⫹ is well studied (3). For this reason, the [Ca2⫹]i depen-
dence was only modeled as the Hill function with a Hill
coefﬁcient of 2 (3).

The subsequent kinetics of IP3 in ␤-cells is unknown.
Therefore, we assume simply that IP3 is converted to inactive
metabolites at a rate proportional to its concentration. Then
synthesis and degradation of IP3 are described by the equa-
tion

d关IP3兴i

dt

⫽ kIP

关Ca2⫹]i
2

关Ca2⫹]i

2 ⫹ KIPCa

2

⫺ kdIP关IP3兴i

(21)

where kIP is the rate constant of IP3 production, kdIP is the
rate constant of IP3 degradation, and KIPCa is the half-
activation of the IP3 production by calcium concentration.

The time constants kIP and kdIP (Table 1) were picked to
correctly reproduce the experimentally observed time course
of the average [Ca2⫹]i during the slow [Ca2⫹]i oscillations
(see RESULTS). KIPCa is taken as 0.4 ␮M (36). The ﬁtted
parameter kdIP (0.04 s⫺1, Table 1; half-life is 17.3 s) is inside
the region of a half-life from 1 to 30 s that has been found for
different cells with a radius of ⬃5 ␮m and above (79), similar
to that of ␤-cells.

CaER

2⫹ mobilization. A Ca2⫹ leak current (Jout) from the ER

per whole cell was taken according to Mears et al. (62)

Jout ⫽ 共Pleak ⫹ PIP3O⬁兲共关Ca2⫹]ER ⫺ 关Ca2⫹]i兲

(22)

where Pleak is the Ca2⫹ leak permeability out of the ER, PIP3
is the maximum permeability through open IP3-activated
channels, and O⬁ is the fraction of open IP3-activated Ca2⫹
channels.

The type III IP3 receptor (IP3R) is the main calcium release
channel in the ␤-cell ER (38). Apparently, in normal physio-
logical conditions, the O⬁ does not depend on the change of
ATP concentration (57). The initial dependence of the IP3R
maximum open probability vs. cytosolic Ca2⫹ could be well
ﬁtted to a Michaelis-Menten-type saturating equation with
an afﬁnity of 0.077 ␮M for [Ca2⫹]i (60).

However, there are conﬂicting data concerning IP3 action.
According to Hagar and Ehrlich (39), the Hill equation with
a Hill coefﬁcient close to 2 was found for the effect of IP3 on
O⬁ in vitro. On the other hand, the Hill number for low
degrees of saturation of the IP3R was estimated at ⬃3.5 in
vivo for rat basophilic leukemia cells (63). On the basis of
these data, the Hill coefﬁcient is set equal to 3. Then

O⬁ ⫽

关Ca2⫹]i

关Ca2⫹]i ⫹ KRCa

关IP3兴i
3
3
3 ⫹ KIP3

关IP3兴i

(23)

where KRCa is the afﬁnity constant of the [Ca2⫹]i to IP3R, and
KIP3 is the constant for IP3 binding to a channel. KIP3 is 3.2
␮M (39).

Ca2⫹ and Na⫹ dynamics. The cytosolic and ER calcium
concentrations and Na⫹ cytosolic concentration are deter-
mined by the ion ﬂuxes across the plasma and ER mem-
branes. However, calcium concentrations are strongly buff-
ered in cells (77). This can be modeled using special coefﬁ-
cients for the fraction of free Ca2⫹ in the cytoplasm and ER
(14, 62, 71). The Ca2⫹ leak from cells by ␤-granule exocytosis
was modeled previously (14) as a rate proportional to [Ca2⫹]i.
We employed a similar approach.

On the basis of the foregoing consideration, the equations

for Ca2⫹ and Na⫹ concentrations can be written as
d关Ca2⫹]i

⫽ fi冉⫺IVCa ⫹ 2INa,Ca ⫺ 2ICa,pump

⫺ Jer,p ⫹

冊

dt

2FVi

Jout
Vi

⫺ ksg关Ca2⫹]i

(24)

(25)

(26)

d关Ca2⫹]ER

⫽

fer
Ver

共Jer,pVi ⫺ Jout兲

dt
⫺3INa,Ca ⫺ 3INa,K ⫺ INa ⫺ ICRAN

d关Na⫹]i

dt

⫽

ViF

where fi and fer are the fractions of free Ca2⫹ in cytoplasm
and ER, Ver and Vi are the effective volumes of the ER and
cytosolic compartments, and ksg is a coefﬁcient of the seques-
tration rate of Ca2⫹

i by the secretory granules.

It has been proposed that the Ca2⫹-binding capacity inside
the ER is lower than in the cytoplasm (69). This can increase
the fraction of free Ca2⫹ in ER; therefore, we used a value of
fer threefold higher than fi (Table 2).

ATP homeostasis. ATP concentration in the cytosol in-
creases somewhat with an increase in glucose supply (2).
However, the rate of ATP production and utilization is a
complex function of the concentrations of ATPi, ADPi, Ca2⫹,
glucose, and numerous other factors. For simplicity, we have
chosen a ﬁrst-order reaction to express the rate of ATPi
production from ADPi.

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

E143

Table 2. Cell and external parameters

Parameters

Symbol Value Units

Reference

Cytosol volume
ER volume
Total membrane capacitance
Fraction of free Ca2⫹ in

cytoplasm

Fraction of free Ca2⫹ in ER
Intracellular K⫹ concentration
Extracellular K⫹ concentration
Extracellular free Ca2⫹

Vi
Ver
Cm

fi
fer
[K⫹]i
[K⫹]o

concentration

[Ca2⫹]o
Extracellular Na⫹ concentration [Na⫹]o
Thermal voltage, RT/F (37°C)

0.764
0.280
6158

pL
pL
fF

(16)
(16)
(62)

(58)
0.01
0.03
Adjusted
132.4 mM Adjusted*
mM Adjusted

8

2.6 mM (58)
140 mM Adjusted
26.73 mV (41)

*Intracellular [K⫹]i and extracellular K⫹ concentrations [K⫹]o

were adjusted to give an equilibrium potential (Eq. 4) of ⫺75 mV.

Clearly, there is some basal level of ATPi consumption in a
cell at low glucose and [Ca2⫹]i. There is also ATP consump-
tion by the PM and ER Ca2⫹ pumps and by the electrogenic
Na⫹-K⫹-ATPase in our model. However, there is consider-
able evidence that other ATP consumption processes are
accelerated by an increase in [Ca2⫹]i in ␤-cells (2, 23, 76). For
this reason, an additional term for ATP consumption was
introduced, which depends on an increase in [Ca2⫹]i. Then
d关ATP兴i

INa,K ⫹ ICa,pump

⫽ kADP关ADP兴i ⫺

⫺

Jer,p
2

ViF

dt

where

⫺ 共kATP,Ca关Ca2⫹]i ⫹ kATP兲关ATP兴i

(27)

Computational aspects. The spread of current between
electrically coupled ␤-cells most probably contributes to the
synchronization of the electrical activity and [Ca2⫹]i oscilla-
tions throughout an islet (33, 37). For this reason, we con-
sider islets as an assemblage of cells with similar properties
and perform the computer simulation only for some mean
individual cell.

The complete system consists of seven state variables:
differential equations describing the time rate of change in
PM potential (V), Ca2⫹, Na⫹, ATP, and IP3 concentrations in
cytoplasm, calcium concentration in ER, and the differential
equations characterizing the voltage-dependent gating vari-
able (n) for the delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ channels (Eqs. 1, 21,
24–27, B1). The units used in the model are time in millisec-
onds (ms), voltage in millivolts (mV), current in femtoam-
peres (fA), concentration in micromoles per liter (␮M), con-
ductance in picosiemens (pS), capacitance in femtofarads
(fF), and temperature in degrees Kelvin (°K).

The model and cell parameters are given in Tables 1–3.
These tables and the appendixes contain all the information
necessary to carry out the simulations presented in this
paper. However, the rate constant for ATPi production (kADP)
is represented in every ﬁgure legend.

Simulations were performed by forward integration of the
coupled system of differential equations. We used two inte-
grated software environments: “Content” for the IBM-com-
patible personal computer using an implicit fourth-order
Runge-Kutta or Rodau IIA method (15) and “Virtual Cell”
accessible via the Internet (55).

This model is available for direct simulation on the website
“Virtual Cell” (www.nrcam.uchc.edu) in “MathModel Data-
base” on the “math workspace” in the library “Fridlyand”
with the name “Chicago.1”.

关ATP兴i ⫹ 关ADP兴i ⫽ 关A兴o

(28)
kADP is the rate constant of ATPi production, kATP,Ca is the
rate constant of ATPi consumption that accelerates as [Ca2⫹]i
increases, and kATP is the permanent rate constant of ATPi
consumption.

The general concentration of

intracellular nucleotides
([A]o) was assumed to be constant. The measured concentra-
tion of adenine nucleotides in pancreatic islets varies within
the limits of 2–10 mM (23). We have taken [A]o to be inside
this range (4 mM).

It is important to ﬁnd a range of parameters for ATP
dynamics. According to the calculations in Ref. 23, the rate of
ATPi production in ␤-cells may run to ⬃0.5 ␮mol ATP 䡠 s⫺1 䡠 g
low glucose concentrations and 1 ␮mol
dry wt⫺1 at
ATP 䡠 s⫺1 䡠 g dry wt⫺1 at high glucose concentrations.
Matschinsky et al. (61) found the corresponding level of
adenine nucleotides to be ⬃20 ␮mol/g dry wt. Then the mean
rate of ATPi production per second can be estimated roughly
as a part of the general quantity of intracellular nucleotides
per unit of volume, that is, as 0.025 or 0.05 [Ao]/s (or 0.1 and
0.2 mM/s) at low and high glucose concentrations, respec-
tively.

The constants kATP,Ca and kATP (Eq. 27 and Table 1) were
ﬁtted to simulate both the observed pattern of [Ca2⫹]i oscil-
lations and the evaluated rate of ATPi production in ␤-cells
above. The simulation of low glucose concentration (kADP ⫽
0.03 s⫺1) leads in our model to a steady-state [ADP]i of 3.068
mM (Table 3) and to a corresponding rate of ATPi production
(kADP [ADP]i) of 0.092 mM/s. The simulation of slow [Ca2⫹]i
oscillations at high glucose levels (kADP ⫽ 0.37 s⫺1; Fig. 3)
yields a mean [ADP]i of 0.7 mM and to the rate of ATPi
production as 0.26 mM/s. This correlates well with the values
evaluated above.

RESULTS

Validation of the Model

It was possible to evaluate the values of the rates of
Ca2⫹ pumps from the simulation of the data from Ref.
25, where the [Ca2⫹]i transients were induced by a 2-s
depolarization. Gall et al. (25) found that the time
constant for the decrease in [Ca2⫹]i is ⬃1.8 s when
Ca2⫹-ATP pumps on the PM and ER were activated
and 4.6 s when Ca2⫹-ATP pumps on the ER were
inhibited by thapsigargin (Tg). This was determined
under conditions where the Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger was
inactive, i.e., gNaCa ⫽ 0, granule exocytosis was lacking
(ksg ⫽ 0), and IP3R was closed (PIP3 ⫽ 0). Using Eqs. 9
and 21, we found that these data can be well simulated
at PCaER ⫽ 0.026 ␮M/ms and PmCap ⫽ 830 fA. However,

Table 3. PM potential and intracellular ion
concentrations at steady state at the simulation
of low glucose concentration (kADP ⫽ 0.03 s⫺1)

Symbol

V
[Ca2⫹]i
[Ca2⫹]ER
[IP3]i
[ATP]i
[Na⫹]i
n

Value

⫺60.9
0.085
22.8
0.33
932.1
9858
0.00123

PM, plasma membrane.

Units

mV
␮M
␮M
␮M
␮M
␮M

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

E144

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

these values should be considered as a lower limit,
whereas the experiments in Ref. 25 were made in
conditions of low ATP concentration, and it is probable
that Ca2⫹ pumps were in an inactivated form. Corre-
spondingly, higher values were ﬁtted in our model (see
Table 1).

A number of parameters were taken from the liter-
ature, such as channel and pump kinetics (see MATERI-
ALS AND METHODS). However, because these values were
sometimes derived from experiments with different
cell lines and speciﬁc experimental conditions, these
parameters were constrained to be within a range
consistent with our own system. Other parameters
were ﬁtted to simulate the pattern of fast and slow
bursting of electrical activity and [Ca2⫹]i oscillations in
␤-cells. The parameters that yield these oscillations
are the standard values given in Table 1. A computer
simulation at a low ATP production rate and the coef-
ﬁcients from Tables 1 and 2 were used to obtain the
steady-state data corresponding to low glucose concen-
trations (Table 3).
Islet Simulations

Slow Ca2⫹ oscillations. Slow Ca2⫹ oscillations occur
spontaneously during glucose stimulation (Fig. 2).
They are characterized by a descending phase in two
components. A rapid decrease in [Ca2⫹]i is followed by
a slower phase. Similar data were obtained by many
investigators for slow oscillations (27, 37, 64). It was
also shown that a rapid decrease in [Ca2⫹]i coin-
cided with the closure of voltage-dependent Ca2⫹ chan-
nels (27).

A typical computer simulation of slow oscillations
with the patterns of membrane potential and corre-
sponding concentrations is illustrated in Fig. 3, left. It
was obtained by introducing a step increase in the rate
constant of ATPi production from the resting condi-
tions (Table 3) to an intermediate value. A detailed
pattern of the concentration changes and correspond-
ing currents is shown in Fig. 5A for a single oscillation.
As can be seen in Fig. 3, the acceleration of ATPi
production increases the [ATP]i/[ADP]i ratio after a
step increase of kADP. This closes KATP channels in the

Fig. 2. Slow Ca2⫹ oscillations and effect of thapsigargin (Tg) in
mouse islets. Mouse islets were loaded with fura 2-AM, and changes
in [Ca2⫹]i [expressed as the 340/380 nm ratio (F340/380)] were re-
corded during 14 mM glucose and subsequent addition of 1 ␮M Tg
(shown).

Fig. 3. Glucose-induced slow electrical bursting and [Ca2⫹]i oscilla-
tions were simulated at a step increase of the rate constant of ATPi
production from a low to an intermediate value (from kADP ⫽ 0.03 s⫺1
to 0.37 s⫺1) at t ⫽ 0 at initial concentration as in Table 3; all other
parameter settings are standard (see Tables 1 and 2). A: [Ca2⫹]i; B:
membrane potential. C: Ca2⫹ in ER ([Ca2⫹]ER). D: cytosolic ATP
([ATP]i). E: cytosolic IP3 ([IP3]i). F: intracellular Na⫹ concentration
([Na⫹]i). For simulation of Tg action, the maximal rate of sarco(en-
do)plasmic reticulum (SERCA; PCaER) was decreased from 0.105 to
0.013 ␮M/ms at arrow 3 in B.

PM. This closure decreases the IKATP that depolarizes
the PM, leading to the opening of voltage-dependent
Ca2⫹ channels, the stimulation of Ca2⫹ inﬂux, and,
eventually, a rise in [Ca2⫹]i. Increasing the IVCa makes
a contribution to depolarization of the PM by itself. The
beginning of electrical spiking is generated at thresh-
old PM potential to form bursts and leads to [Ca2⫹]i
increase (Fig. 3B, arrow 1). Continuous spiking follows
up to a point at which the repolarizing processes lead to
decreased PM potential. This in turn leads to the
closure of voltage-gated Ca2⫹ channels and the contin-
uous spiking terminates (Fig. 3B, arrow 2). In the
silent phase, slow depolarization of the PM begins until
all processes repeat, leading to continuous oscillations.

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

E145

Dissection of the burst mechanism and the effects of Tg
will be discussed in Model Sensitivity to Slow Vari-
ables.

Biphasic responses and fast Ca2⫹ oscillations. Fast
oscillations usually show a more complex picture. In
this case, the electrical response of pancreatic islets to
step increases in glucose concentration is often bipha-
sic, consisting of a prolonged depolarization with action
potentials (Phase 1) followed by fast bursts of mem-
brane potential and Ca2⫹ oscillations. The initial tonic
electrical activity is accompanied by a sustained eleva-
tion of [Ca2⫹]i (8, 72, 89).

It was suggested by model simulations and experi-
mental results that the Phase 1 response may result
from the combined inﬂuences of depolarizing KATP
channel closure and ICRAN deactivation. The Ca2⫹ ﬁlls
the ER during Phase 1, deactivating ICRAN and repo-
larizing the PM, allowing steady-state bursting to com-
mence (8, 62). We are also able to simulate these
results on the basis of our model when Ca2⫹ ﬁlls the ER
to considerably elevated concentrations. This increase
of [Ca2⫹]ER can occur if Ca2⫹ output from the ER is
restricted, for example, by closing IP3R channels. This
can be achieved in our model, for example, by decreas-
ing the [IP3]i as a consequence of decreased IP3 pro-
duction. The typical Phase 1 response followed by
spike-burst behavior of the membrane potential and
the fast oscillation patterns of ions and [ATP]i are
illustrated in Fig. 4. It was simulated at a decreased
IP3 synthesis rate constant and an intermediate value
of the rate constant of ATPi production.

The same results can be simply obtained by a partial
closing of the IP3R channels in place of the decreased
IP3 production (not shown). Our model also shows that
the duration of Phase 1 decreases with increased initial
[Ca2⫹]ER at t ⫽ 0 (not shown; see Ref. 62).

Simulating increased ATPi production leads to in-
creased oscillation frequency, progressing to continu-
ous spiking with a further increase in the ATPi produc-
tion rate constant (Fig. 4). This is in reasonably good
agreement with the experimental data (13, 37).

Note that fast [Ca2⫹]i oscillations simulated by our
model (Fig. 4) have an appearance very similar to those
observed in pancreatic ␤-cells (8, 72). They also resem-
ble the fast oscillations that were obtained in preceding
models (8, 14, 62). This is not surprising, because our
simulation of fast oscillations is close to those em-
ployed in these models.

Model Sensitivity to Slow Variables

Four parameters can change slowly in our model
([ATP]i, [Ca2⫹]ER, [IP3]i, and [Na⫹]i), and their varia-
tions can lead to a slow membrane repolarization dur-
ing a depolarized phase and to a depolarization in a
silent phase. To determine the role of different pro-
cesses and parameters, we performed an analysis of
model sensitivity to slow variables to ﬁx some param-
eters at their mean level for some kind of oscillations.
It was found that the slow oscillations take place when
only [Na⫹]i ([ATP]i, [Ca2⫹]ER, and [IP3]i were constant)

Fig. 4. Biphasic response to glucose in islets, simulated by increase
of kADP from 0.03 to 0.45 s⫺1 at low rate of IP3 synthesis (kIP from Eq.
21 is 0.1 instead 0.3 ␮M/s in Fig. 3) at t ⫽ 0. All other parameter
settings are as in Fig. 3. For simulation of glucose addition at arrow
1, kADP was increased from 0.45 to 0.7 s⫺1 and at arrow 2 from 0.7 to
2 s⫺1.

can change (Fig. 5D), and the characteristic fast oscil-
lations occur when only [Ca2⫹]ER ([ATP]i, [Na⫹]i, and
[IP3]i were constant) can vary (Fig. 5C). Consideration
of these two cases simpliﬁes the general analysis.

The behavior of [Ca2⫹]i, V, [Ca2⫹]ER, [IP3]i, and
[Na⫹]i and the most essential current components is
shown in Fig. 5, A and B, for single oscillations of slow
and fast types. Because of the large ﬂuctuations of
ICRAN, the voltage-independent part of this current
(fCRAN, Eq. 12) is also represented to facilitate the
analysis (broken lines in Fig. 5.9). Corresponding con-
centrations and currents are also represented for cases
when only [Ca2⫹]ER (Fig. 5C) or [Na⫹]i (Fig. 5D) can
change. The contribution of other currents was either
insigniﬁcant (INa) or does not change considerably be-
tween cases (ICa,pump, IKDr, IKCa, IKATP).

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

E146

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

Fig. 5. Simulation of single oscilla-
tions. Model solutions were obtained
from the oscillation pattern after sim-
ulation of glucose addition as in Figs. 3
and 4. Concentrations, PM potential,
and some currents are represented for
1 characteristic oscillation. Broken
lines in Fig. 5.9 correspond to a mem-
brane potential-independent part of
ICRAN conductance (fCRAN, Eq. 12).
Units are shown in series, labeled in A
with the exception of Fig. 5.3 for
[Ca2⫹]ER, where units are shown for
every case. A: single characteristic
slow oscillation from Fig. 3 (left). Bro-
ken line in A.1 corresponds to a single
[Ca2⫹]i oscillation, when only [IP3]i
was ﬁxed at its mean level (3 ␮M) with
other parameters, as at the beginning
of Fig. 3. B: single characteristic fast
oscillation from beginning of Fig. 4. C:
simulation of single characteristic os-
cillation determined only by [Ca2⫹]ER
changes at kADP ⫽ 0.45 s⫺1. Other slow
variables were frozen at their mean
level for fast oscillations in B: [IP3]i ⫽ 1
␮M, [Na⫹]i ⫽ 6 mM, [ATP]i ⫽ 3.5 mM.
D: simulation of single characteristic
oscillation determined only by [Na⫹]i
changes at kADP ⫽ 0.37 s⫺1. Other slow
variables were frozen at their mean
level for slow oscillation in A: [IP3]i ⫽ 3
␮M, [Ca2⫹]ER ⫽ 50 ␮M, [ATP]i ⫽ 3.3
mM.

ATP sensitivity. Activation of the Na⫹/K⫹ pump with
increased [Na⫹]i concentration during the depolarized
phase accelerates ATP consumption in our model. To-
tal Ca2⫹ pump rates and Ca2⫹-dependent ATPi con-
sumption also increase during the depolarized phase
with [Ca2⫹]i rising (see Eq. 27). The acceleration of
ATPi consumption leads to a decreased [ATP]i/[ADP]i
ratio (Figs. 3 and 4). It is therefore possible that cyclic
changes in the [ATP]i/[ADP]i ratio control the cyclic
closure and reopening of KATP channels. This has been
proposed as a mechanism underlying the oscillatory
behavior of ␤-cells (1, 65, 82).

We evaluated this possibility and found that ﬁxing
[ATP]i at a mean level yields no noticeable effect on the
oscillatory pattern shown in Fig. 5, A and B. This can

be explained by insigniﬁcant changes of the fraction of
KATP channels open (APPENDIX C) during the ATPi vari-
ations around its mean value (not shown). This sug-
gests that [ATP]i is not the variable that drives slow
oscillations in our model. On the other hand, consider-
able changes in mean [ATP]i and correspondingly in
IKATP can lead to a dramatic change in oscillations (see
Figs. 3 and 4).

Single-oscillation analyses. It can be seen that spike
activity is generated by the alternate activation of
delayed rectifying K⫹ channels and voltage-gated Ca2⫹
channels in every case. It is analogous to other models
and has been previously analyzed (14, 78). The main
difference between the models includes the nature of
processes that lead to slow depolarization of PM poten-

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

E147

tial during the depolarized phase and to its repolariz-
ing during a silent phase.

When [Ca2⫹]ER is the only slow parameter ([ATP]i,
[Na⫹]i, and [IP3]i were constants; Fig. 5C), the fol-
lowing mechanism is responsible for oscillations: ris-
2⫹ during the depolarized phase leads to in-
ing Cai
creased Ca2⫹ pumping from the cytoplasm to the ER
2⫹ accumulation, with corresponding closure
and to CaER
of CRAN channels and decreased ICRAN, that can be
observed more clearly from the change of the voltage-
independent part of ICRAN (fCRAN, broken line in Fig.
5C.9). This, in turn, leads to PM repolarization. These
processes have opposite directions in the silent phase.
Figure 5D shows that, when [Na⫹]i is the only slow
variable ([ATP]i, [Ca2⫹]ER, and [IP3]i were constant),
INa,K is the main current that manages the slow PM
potential changes leading to oscillations. The mecha-
nism involves increased [Ca2⫹]i during a depolarized
period, activating the outward Ca2⫹ ﬂux through Na⫹/
Ca2⫹ exchangers and a corresponding inward Na⫹ ﬂux.
The resultant increase in [Na⫹]i leads to the slow
increase of outward current
through electrogenic
Na⫹/K⫹ pumps (INa,K; Fig. 5D.7) with corresponding
PM repolarization. Falling [Na⫹]i during a silent phase
leads to decreased INa,K and then in turn to PM depo-
larization.

In the simulation of slow oscillations shown in Fig.
5A, [Na⫹]i and the current INa,K change as in Fig. 5D,
with no change of the voltage-independent part of the
current ICRAN (fCRAN). Correspondingly, the mecha-
nism of slow oscillations is the mechanism described
above, with [Na⫹]i as the only slow variable.

In the simulation of fast oscillations shown in Fig.
5B, [Ca2⫹]ER and fCRAN change as in Fig. 5C, with little
change of [Na⫹]i and the corresponding current INa,K.
In this case, the currents INa,K and ICRAN act together.
However, ICRAN plays the major part, as the concen-
trations and currents are similar in Fig. 5, B and C.
This is in agreement with the conclusion that [Ca2⫹]ER
drives the fast oscillations but does not need to oscillate
to have slow oscillations, whereas [Na⫹]i gives slow
oscillations but does not need to oscillate to have fast
oscillations.

However, in the case of fast oscillations, CRAN chan-
nels are working under conditions when the ER is ﬁlled
with Ca2⫹, and the [Ca2⫹]ER change occurs close to the
half-activation level of [Ca2⫹]ER for CRAN channels
(200 ␮M; see Eq. 12 and Table 1). This leads to an
increased rate of both PM potential depolarization and
repolarization, when [Ca2⫹]ER correspondingly in-
creases and decreases following [Ca2⫹]i changes.

Shape of slow [Ca2⫹]i oscillations and role of IP3. It
can be seen in our simulations that, at the beginning of
2⫹ is gradually
the silent period of slow oscillations, CaER
released into the cytosol (Figs. 3 and 5A.3) and the
shape of the [Ca2⫹]i curve is close to what was found by
us (Fig. 2) and others (27, 83) in experiments. Such a
slow phase is absent at the simulation of fast oscilla-
tions (Figs. 3 and 5B.1).

When [IP3]i was ﬁxed at its mean level at the
conditions that were used to simulate slow oscilla-

tions, there was still the ability to produce some
oscillations. However, the slow [Ca2⫹]i decrease dis-
appears at the beginning of the silent period. This
resulting single [Ca2⫹]i oscillation is shown as a
broken line in Fig. 5A.1.

The relationship between [Ca2⫹]i and [Ca2⫹]ER needs
additional clariﬁcation. In our model, a dynamic equi-
librium is established between [Ca2⫹]i and [Ca2⫹]ER for
several seconds when there is no spiking activity; that
is, [Ca2⫹]i and [Ca2⫹]ER are closely connected. The
decrease in [IP3]i leads to a corresponding, slow IP3R
channel closure that decreases the rate of Ca2⫹ ﬂux
from the ER. A slow [Ca2⫹]ER drop leads to a slow
decrease in [Ca2⫹]i at their dynamic equilibrium. When
the [IP3]i is ﬁxed, this mechanism does not operate,
and the slow [Ca2⫹]i drop disappears.

No remarkable changes in the fast oscillations pat-
tern (shown in Fig. 5B) were observed if [IP3]i was ﬁxed
at its mean level with otherwise identical conditions
(not shown). The lack of an effect can be understood in
light of the small changes in [IP3]i that occur during
fast oscillations (see Figs. 4 and 5B.4).

This suggests that changes in [IP3]i are not the main
driving force for the fast and slow oscillations in our
model. However, the change of mean [IP3]i can have a
considerable effect, including a transformation of slow
oscillations to fast at decreasing [IP3]i (compare Figs. 3
and 4). Furthermore, [IP3]i changes can have a consid-
erable effect on the pattern of slow oscillations.

Role of the ER. In islets pretreated with Tg to block
the SERCA pump, the frequency was increased, the
amplitude of slow [Ca2⫹]i oscillations was larger than
in control islets, and the descending phase of each
[Ca2⫹]i oscillation was fast with no slow descending
second phase (Fig. 2; see also Refs. 27, 64).

Our model permits a simulation of these experi-
ments (Fig. 3). In this case, the corresponding ampli-
tude of slow [Ca2⫹]i oscillations was larger, the period
of oscillation was shorter, and the descending phase of
each [Ca2⫹]i oscillation was fast with no slow second
phase (Fig. 3), all of which are in reasonably good
agreement with the experimental data.

In this case, Ca2⫹ in the ER does not drive the
oscillations. However, the remaining [Na⫹]i-dependent
mechanisms are able to create the relevant oscilla-
tions, and corresponding ﬂuxes resemble the ones that
were observed if the oscillations were driven only by
Nai variations, as in Fig. 5D.

A different pattern was found when SERCA pumps
were blocked in fast oscillation experiments. Worley et
al. (89) observed that, when Tg was added to the
medium, the bursting was transformed to continuous
spiking, and fast [Ca2⫹]i oscillations were converted to
a tonically elevated Ca2⫹ level. Bertram et al. (8) found
that an addition of Tg was accompanied by a gradual
increase in the plateau fraction and in electrical burst
frequency.

However, in our general model, blocking of SERCA
leads to the pattern of slow oscillations, as shown in
Fig. 3, right. For this reason, other possibilities were
investigated. When oscillations were simulated only by

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

E148

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

changes in [Ca2⫹]ER (by ﬁxing [Na⫹]i, [IP3]i, and [ATP]i
to constant values, as in Fig. 5C), the block of the
SERCA pumps increased the frequency of fast [Ca2⫹]i
oscillations, because ICRAN is activated in consequence
of [Ca2⫹]ER decrease. A further increase of SERCA
inhibition can then lead to a permanent PM depolar-
ization and to a continuous rise in [Ca2⫹]i (Fig. 6). This
transformation is consistent with the aforementioned
experiments for fast oscillations. It is also in agree-
ment with the results of the modeling of Chay (14) and
Bertram et al. (8), who had not included [Na⫹]i changes
in their models and had taken into account only Ca2⫹
and K⫹ currents and [Ca2⫹]ER inﬂuence on ICRAN.

In other words, the model suggests that, under con-
ditions when fast oscillations occur, something is block-
ing the [Na⫹]i-dependent oscillation mechanisms, even
though Tg action resulted in a depletion of the CaER
store. One possible mechanism is a partial inhibition of
the Na⫹/K⫹ pump. For example, we found that only
[Ca2⫹]ER-dependent fast oscillations were possible in
our model when the maximum activity of the Na⫹-K⫹-
ATPase was diminished to 25% of basal activity, even
though all other coefﬁcients and initial concentrations
were as in Fig. 4. In this case, a simulation of Tg action
at fast oscillations resembles Fig. 6. However, the
physiological differences between fast and slow oscilla-
tions need further examination.

Role of [Na⫹]i. Slow glucose-induced [Na⫹]i oscilla-
tions were found in individual ␤-cells under conditions
known to induce oscillations of [Ca2⫹]i (34, 35). Partial
suppression of the Na⫹/K⫹ pump by ouabain resulted
in an increased amplitude of slow Na⫹ and Ca2⫹ oscil-
lations and decreased their frequency. Slow [Na⫹]i and
[Ca2⫹]i oscillations were converted to tonically elevated
[Na⫹]i and [Ca2⫹]i levels following increased ouabain
concentration (34, 35).

Our simulation leads to analogous results (Fig. 7).
This result can be explained on the basis of our model:
the partial suppression of the Na⫹/K⫹ pump leads to
decreased INa,K, which is responsible for slow PM po-

Fig. 7. Simulated applications of ouabain to a cell that exhibits slow
oscillations with the initial simulation as in Fig. 3. Addition of
ouabain is modeled by decreasing PNaK from 600 to 200 fA (arrow 1)
in B and from 200 to 150 fA (arrow 2).

tential variations. For this reason, to obtain the same
value of INa,K variation that leads to a corresponding
PM potential change, it was necessary to have larger
[Na⫹]i changes. This extends the time necessary for
corresponding [Na⫹]i accumulation or dissipation. The
increase in Na⫹/K⫹ pump inhibition leads to collapse of
this [Na⫹]i-connected mechanism and to the disappear-
ance of slow oscillations.

To check the role of [Na⫹]i in driving slow oscilla-
tions, we also froze [Na⫹]i at its mean level character-
ized for slow oscillations (7 mM) and made a simulation
at the initial conditions by using the coefﬁcients char-
acterized for slow oscillations (as in Fig. 3). No oscilla-
tions were found (not shown).

Our model simulations demonstrate the necessity for
[Na⫹]i oscillations to drive the slow Ca2⫹ oscillations
and suggest that [Na⫹]i is a candidate pacemaker for
slow oscillations.
␤-Cell Lines

We have previously studied the properties of a clonal
␤-cell line termed ␤TC3-neo (74). In contrast to normal
mouse islets, this cell line does not usually respond to
a step increase in glucose concentration with regular
oscillatory increases in [Ca2⫹]i. Instead, a slow rise in
[Ca2⫹]i occurs with occasional
intermittent spikes.
However, the exposure of ␤TC3-neo cells to 20 mM
TEA, a blocker of K⫹ channels (24), permitted the
generation by glucose of large, regular, slow oscilla-
tions in [Ca2⫹]i. In the absence of glucose, TEA was
without effect (74). However, the molecular differences
between ␤TC3-neo cells and primary ␤-cells have not
been completely studied.

The magnitude of the Ca2⫹ inward current in ␤-cells
within intact pancreatic islets is considerably more
than in individual ␤-cells maintained in tissue culture
[up to twice (33)]. This difference can be expected to
have dramatic effects on the generation of ␤-cell elec-

Fig. 6. Model simulation of Tg action on fast oscillations at kADP ⫽
0.45 s⫺1 with the initial simulation as in Fig. 4 and frozen concen-
trations of [ATP]i, [Na⫹]i, and [IP3]i as in Fig. 5C. Maximal rate of
SERCA (PCaER) was decreased from 0.105 to 0.0785 ␮M/ms at arrow
1 in B and from 0.0785 to 0.0524 ␮M/ms at arrow 2.

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

E149

trical activity and leads to failure of dispersed cells to
generate the characteristic oscillatory electrical activ-
ity (33, 81). It is reasonable to assume that ␤TC3-neo
cells also have a decreased Ca2⫹ inward current that
can be simulated by a reduced conductance of Ca2⫹
channels in our model.

Under these conditions, i.e., reduced conductance of
Ca2⫹ channels, simulation of glucose addition does not
lead to oscillations. However, a partial block of de-
layed-rectiﬁer K⫹ channels, small-conductance Ca2⫹-
activated K⫹ channels, and KATP channels, which sim-
ulate TEA action, leads to large, regular oscillations in
our model (Fig. 8). This occurs because the decreased
inward Ca2⫹ current leads to PM repolarization. To
restore the possibility of oscillations, a corresponding
decrease of K⫹ outward currents, as by TEA action, is
required to allow PM depolarization.

The exposure of ␤TC3-neo cells to 1 ␮M nitrendipine,
which blocks L-type Ca2⫹ channels, can reversibly sup-
press oscillatory activity (Fig. 1C in Ref. 74). In our
model, a similar decrease in Ca2⫹ channel activity also
leads to a suppression of oscillatory activity (not
shown).

In the absence of glucose, exposure of ␤TC3-neo cells
to 100 ␮M tolbutamide to block IKATP induced [Ca2⫹]i
oscillations only in the presence of TEA (Fig. 2A in Ref.

Fig. 9. Model simulation of a ␤-cell line experiment at a low glucose
level (kADP ⫽ 0.03 s⫺1 for all time) and the additional action of TEA
and tolbutamide. To simulate TEA action, coefﬁcients were taken as
in Fig. 8B at arrow 1. To simulate tolbutamide action, maximal
conductance for KATP was decreased from from 12,000 to 4,000 pS at
arrow 2.

74). The same results were obtained with our model
(Fig. 9) when an additional block of KATP channels was
used to simulate tolbutamide effects. In this case, the
simulation of tolbutamide addition on IKATP was equiv-
alent to the simulation of glucose additions in Fig. 8.
Similar experimental results were obtained by Eber-
hardson and Grapengiesser (21) for single ␤-cells iso-
lated from mouse islets, in which the [Ca2⫹]i oscilla-
tions could be obtained at low glucose concentration
only when both TEA and tolbutamide were added.

DISCUSSION

We have attempted to integrate plasma membrane
and intracellular events in modeling the behavior of
pancreatic ␤-cells by building on several previous mod-
els. The model includes consideration of ionic ﬂux,
metabolism, and regulation by intracellular messen-
gers. The complexity of the system necessarily left us
with some ﬂexibility in assigning values of the param-
eters. Therefore, it would be unreasonable to expect the
model to accurately reproduce all previously observed
experimental results. However, it is necessary to verify
that the model is able to reproduce the general features
of ␤-cell or islet oscillation patterns.
Islet Oscillatory Behavior

The majority of previous models emphasized the
features of fast-type oscillations, and detailed theoret-
ical considerations of this kind of oscillations have been
made (14, 26, 62, 65, 78). We were also able to simulate
these fast oscillations (Figs. 4 and 5B). Slow oscilla-
tions most likely constitute a physiological oscillatory
pattern in ␤-cells, and they may constitute the frame-
work for pulsatile insulin release observed in vivo (28,
37). For this reason, an explanation for this type of
oscillation in islets and ␤-cell lines is the main aim of
this article.

It is critical to determine the degree of correlation
between observed and simulated ␤-cell behavior. Sev-
eral recent studies in the literature have shown addi-

Fig. 8. Model simulation of a ␤-cell line experiment at intermediate
glucose level was made at a step increase of rate constant of ATP
production from low to intermediate value (from kADP ⫽ 0.03 to 0.25
s⫺1) at t ⫽ 0; all other parameter setting are standard (see Tables
1–3), with the exception of gmVCa for voltage-activated Ca2⫹ current
that was decreased from 770 to 300 pS. For simulation of tetraeth-
ylammonium (TEA) action at arrow 1, maximal conductance for K⫹
channels was decreased: for KATP from 24,000 to 12,000 pS, for a
delayed rectiﬁer K⫹ current from 3,000 to 800 pS, and for the
voltage-independent small conductance Ca2⫹-activated K⫹ current
from 130 to 60 pS.

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

E150

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

tional experimental results consistent with the model
that we present here, even though the authors’ own
interpretation is not identical to our model results. For
example, KATP channel data (51) and data on glucose
concentrations and oxygen consumption (2, 17) suggest
that the ATP/ADP ratio may indeed oscillate on a time
scale appropriate for the generation of slow oscilla-
tions. It was found that the ATP/ADP ratio drops
rapidly when [Ca2⫹]i is raised and increases when
[Ca2⫹]i falls (2, 19). These results are consistent with
our calculations of [ATP]i behavior (Fig. 3). However, it
should be pointed out that the [Ca2⫹]i-dependent
changes in the ATP/ADP ratio are not driving oscilla-
tions in our model.

The assumption that [IP3]i can oscillate concomi-
tantly with [Ca2⫹]i has received recent experimental
support by the indirect demonstration of IP3 oscilla-
tions in ATP-stimulated Madin-Darby canine kidney
epithelial cells (42). For murine ␤-cells in suspension,
the intracellular IP3 level oscillated approximately in
synchrony with changes in [Ca2⫹]i when driven by the
sequential addition of glucose, an ␣2-adrenergic stim-
ulus, and extracellular Ca2⫹ (5). It was also shown in
RESULTS that our simulations are also consistent with
data for [Na⫹]i oscillations.

All of these data are in reasonably good agreement
with our model. However, it is important to emphasize
that, although the modeled voltage and ion depen-
dences are consistent with available data, the simulta-
neous measurements of the voltage dependence, rela-
tive conductance of different channels, and [Ca2⫹]i,
[ATP]i, [Na⫹]i, [Ca2⫹]ER, and [IP3]i oscillations have
not been directly demonstrated and need to be tested.
In addition, it should be pointed out that large oscil-
lations in [ATP]i, [Ca2⫹]ER, [Na⫹]i, and [IP3]i should
only be forthcoming in the slow [Ca2⫹]i oscillations, as
was calculated above (Figs. 3, 5A, and 7). Fast [Ca2⫹]i
oscillations can follow very small changes in other
components (Figs. 4 and 5B), and it can be very difﬁcult
to measure these changes.

␤-Cell Modeling: Identity of Slow Variables

Several types of models can explain electrical burst-
ing and [Ca2⫹]i oscillations in ␤-cells. All known mod-
els have negative feedback from a slow variable driving
the oscillations but differ in the identity of what the
slow variable might be.

The ﬁrst ␤-cell models were based on the hypothesis
that the [Ca2⫹]i is the slow variable, inﬂuencing the
membrane through a Ca2⫹-activated K⫹ current. How-
ever, the spectrophotometric measurements show that
the time scale of the [Ca2⫹]i change is short relative to
the oscillation period (see Refs. 26 and 78 for details).
For this reason, we have not created a model in which
[Ca2⫹]i is a possible driving slow variable.

The possibility that the ATP/ADP ratio is the slow
variable driving electrical bursting by acting on the
KATP channel was modeled by several investigators
(46, 65, 82). However, the bursts and [Ca2⫹]i oscilla-
tions were principally obtained with a time constant

appropriate for fast bursting in these models. Further-
more, it was shown in Refs. 74 and 75 that bursting
and [Ca2⫹]i oscillations persist in the presence of a
KATP channel blocker under conditions where IKATP is
substantially decreased. This fact argues against a
critical role for oscillations in KATP channels in these
processes. We have also shown that, despite the fact
that the change of mean ATP concentration can induce
the oscillations or change their pattern, the ATP/ADP
oscillation is not the driving force of [Ca2⫹]i oscillations
in our model.

Several models have been proposed in which the
dynamics of Ca2⫹ in the ER serves as the slow variable
driving bursting (8, 13, 14, 26, 62). The ICRAN modiﬁes
the oscillation period and membrane potential in these
models. We also followed these proposals for modeling
fast oscillations. Our previous considerations (in RE-
SULTS) showed that the dynamics of Ca2⫹ in the ER
could be responsible for creating corresponding fast
2⫹ level, where there
oscillations at a relatively high CaER
is a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of [Ca2⫹]ER changes on ICRAN.
Although these models (8, 13, 14, 26, 62) have been
applied mainly to an analysis of fast oscillations, this
mechanism was also used for the generation of slow
oscillations. Slow [Ca2⫹]i oscillations were obtained by
Chay (14) at a decreased coefﬁcient of Ca2⫹
ER release
from the ER. This retards the processes connected with
2⫹ dynamics and, in turn, transforms fast oscilla-
CaER
tions to slow. Increased [Ca2⫹]ER accompanies a de-
creased Ca2⫹ release from the ER. This means that the
slow oscillations were generated at relatively high
[Ca2⫹]ER in the model (14), contrary to our results.
Emptying of the ER leads to termination of both fast
and slow oscillations in the Chay model.

Arguments have been made against the CaER

2⫹-depen-
dent model for slow oscillations, since it seems to be at
odds with data demonstrating that slow oscillations
persist in the presence of Tg (6, 54, 64), an agent that
blocks SERCA and empties the ER stores. These data
were also analyzed above (in RESULTS), where we dem-
onstrated that SERCA block can eliminate fast oscilla-
tions, while leaving intact the mechanism creating
slow oscillations via the change in [Na⫹]i oscillations.
2⫹-dependent
For this reason, an expansion of the CaER
model for fast oscillations to slow oscillations made by
Chay (14) appears unjustiﬁed.

Recently, a Ca2⫹-sensitive K⫹ conductance was iso-
lated that activates with a time constant of 2.3 s and
inactivates with a time constant of 6.5 s in response to
stimuli during voltage clamp (32). The authors con-
cluded that that current, similar to a Ca2⫹-activated
K⫹ current, played an important role in the generation
of ␤-cell oscillatory activity. However, these time con-
stants can only correspond to the fast oscillations.

Goforth at al. (31) have developed a new model to
explain this slow K⫹ current, where [Ca2⫹]ER is also
taken as the initial slow variable driving bursting.
They introduced a new cytoplasmic Ca2⫹ pool localized
between the ER and PM. Ca2⫹ released from the ER
goes ﬁrst to this intermediate Ca2⫹ pool. The changes
of [Ca2⫹]i in this intermediate Ca2⫹ pool serve in this

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

E151

model to modulate the current through the Ca2⫹-acti-
vated K⫹ channels. We note also that the the value for
the half-activation Ca2⫹ concentration assumed by Go-
forth at al. is much higher (0.7 ␮M) than that for the
SK3 channels included here (0.1 ␮M).

However, Goforth at al. (31) chose this half-activa-
tion Ca2⫹ concentration arbitrarily to ﬁt their model,
speciﬁcally to address a potential high [Ca2⫹]i pool in
the sub-PM region. Although such a Ca2⫹ pool has
been proposed for excitatory cells, it has not been
directly shown in ␤-cells, nor has the “real” value of the
half-activation Ca2⫹ concentration for KCa channel in
␤-cells been determined. Kanno et al. (44) also suggest
that this slow K⫹ current is determined not only by
KCa channels. They found that activation and a reac-
tivation of KATP channels can play a fundamental role
in this slow K⫹ current in intact mouse pancreatic
islets.

In addition, as was discussed above, every model of
slow oscillations based on the proposal that [Ca2⫹]ER is
the slow variable driving oscillations seems to be at
odds with data demonstrating that slow oscillations
persist in the presence of agents that block SERCA and
empty the ER stores. This would restrict application of
the Goforth et al. model to fast oscillations.

A very detailed model was developed by Magnus and
Keizer (58, 59). They proposed (and simulated) that
Ca2⫹ in mitochondria is the main regulator of the
mitochondrial membrane potential, thus affecting ATP
synthesis and corresponding [Ca2⫹]i oscillations. How-
ever, the view that mitochondrial change of calcium
regulates ATP production under physiological condi-
tions has been questioned (2, 27), and experimental
support is still incomplete for the idea that changes in
the ATP/ADP ratio are the main driving mechanism
for all Ca2⫹ oscillations (see above).

Despite the clear evidence that IP3 is one of the
critical cellular messengers inducing Ca2⫹ mobiliza-
tion from intracellular stores (38), IP3 kinetics have not
previously been included in the models of the pancre-
atic ␤-cell. Our model produced a simulation with a
good match to data reported from several laboratories.
The simulations also underlined how the IP3 concen-
tration was critical to understanding the pattern of
slow [Ca2⫹]i oscillations even though IP3 does not ac-
count for the mechanism of oscillations.

Our simulations suggest that the change in [Na⫹]i is
one of the most important slow variables that govern
slow [Ca2⫹]i oscillations. Kitasato et al. (47) proposed
such a role for Na⫹. According to these authors, an
increase in [Ca2⫹]i results in an increase in [Na⫹]i
because of Na⫹/Ca2⫹ exchanger activity. The increase
in cytosolic Na⫹ results in enhanced ATP consumption
at Na⫹/K⫹ pump sites and in a decreased ATP/ADP
ratio, which in turn could lead to activation of KATP
channels followed by membrane repolarization. A de-
crease in [Ca2⫹]i results in the opposite order of events
during a silent phase. This scenario was modeled by
Miwa and Imai (65) as the underlying mechanism of
[Ca2⫹]i oscillations. However, this mechanism does not
explain the experimental data suggesting that ATP/

ADP ratio changes are not the main driving force for
[Ca2⫹]i oscillations (see above).

Our model simulates an increase in [Na⫹]i and a
corresponding decrease in [ATP]i during the depolar-
ized phase by use of a similar mechanism. However,
our model shows that an increase of [Na⫹]i during the
depolarized phase and a corresponding increase of out-
ward current through Na⫹/K⫹ pumps could be sufﬁ-
cient for PM repolarization that leads to transition to
silent phase, even though a change of ATP concentra-
tion is not directly driving oscillations.

Slow oscillations of PM potential and [Ca2⫹]i were
obtained in previous models (e.g., Refs. 7 and 78) by
introducing a special slow variable that does not have
a clear metabolic basis. Our work is an attempt to ﬁnd
some real metabolic basis for this suggestion. Accord-
ing to our analysis, the Na⫹ concentration in the cyto-
plasm may be the desired slow variable.

We also found that some coefﬁcients used in previous
models do not always correspond to physiological
mechanisms. It has been suggested in previous models
that Ca2⫹ is removed from the cytoplasm only by se-
questration mechanisms that do not create any PM
currents. For example, in one model (13), the mitochon-
drion sequesters intracellular Ca2⫹ with a rate con-
stant of 3,000 s⫺1, and this calcium is not recycled to
the cytoplasm. In other examples, the Ca2⫹ removal
rate through the PM (e.g., by sequestration in secretory
granules) was assigned the following coefﬁcients: 120
s⫺1 (82), 190 s⫺1 (58), and 640 s⫺1 by Gall and Susa (26)
in their models II and III. This means that, in all of
these models, total cytoplasmic Ca2⫹ disappears from
the ␤-cells in only seconds as the result of mechanisms
that do not create any current through the PM. We
could not ﬁnd any data to support such a signiﬁcant
ﬂux created by sequestration mechanisms. Ca2⫹ is
removed mainly by well-known PM Ca2⫹ pumps in our
model that create a corresponding PM current (Eq. 8).
The coefﬁcient for the sequestration rate of Ca2⫹
through the PM (ksg in Eq. 24) was estimated in our
models as 0.1 s⫺1, and we consider this to be a more
reasonable value.

In the model by Miwa and Imai (65), only Na⫹/K⫹
active transporters and the Ca2⫹ pumps on the PM
were employed to simulate ATP consumption in
␤-cells. Furthermore, the rate constant of ATP produc-
tion from ADP was ⬃0.03 s⫺1 at high glucose levels.
Other ATP consumption mechanisms exist in cells,
which we simulate in our model (Eq. 27). The rate
constant of ATP production from ADP was also consid-
erably increased in our model (up to 10 times in Fig. 3)
to be in agreement with experimental observations of
ATP production rate (see MATERIALS AND METHODS). Fur-
thermore, no ﬂux analysis or analysis of oscillations at
ﬁxed values of ATP concentrations was made in (65).
On the basis of simulations in our model, it seems
possible that, in the model of Miwa and Imai, a change
of Na⫹ concentration also can directly effect PM poten-
tial by a change of INa/K.

Several additional slow variables can also take part
in the regulation of oscillations in ␤-cells. For example,

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

E152

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

the concentrations of such ions as K⫹ and Cl⫺ were
used as independent variables in the model (65). Un-
questionably, K⫹ concentration in the cytoplasm is
very important. However, all cells, including ␤-cells,
have 100–130 mM K⫹ concentration in the cytoplasm,
and its relative change must be small, particularly
during fast oscillations (65). For this reason, we did not
include K⫹ cytoplasmic concentration as an indepen-
dent variable in this model. It has also been found that
glucose stimulation of the ␤-cells is coupled to an in-
crease in their Cl⫺ permeability and that the oscilla-
tory Ca2⫹ signaling may be critically dependent on
transmembrane Cl⫺ ﬂuxes (22). It seems plausible that
additional kinetic equations for K⫹, Cl⫺, and other ions
and their channels may become necessary for this
model in the future to include emerging aspects of
␤-cell physiology.

In conclusion, our results support the hypothesis that
it is necessary to include all essential ionic channels and
pumps that have been identiﬁed in ␤-cells to employ
mathematical models to correctly simulate the set of
experimental results. Results from the simulations sup-
port the hypothesis that [Ca2⫹]ER and [Na⫹]i can be the
main variables driving both fast and slow [Ca2⫹]i oscilla-
tions and that the regulation of Ca2⫹ leak from the ER by
IP3 is also important to explain the pattern of slow cal-
cium oscillations. The results of the modeling favor a
scenario where two or more slow variables interact to
produce oscillations, in agreement with other recent mod-
els (6, 7). On the basis of our analysis, it seems likely that
differences in relative activity of channels and pumps
could explain the variations in the electrical bursts and
[Ca2⫹]i oscillations between the islets, cell lines, and
single ␤-cells.

APPENDIX B: GENERAL GATING VARIABLE FOR IKDR

According to Gall and Susa (26) and Sherman (78), the

general gating variable for IKDr can be determined as

dn
dt

⫽

n⬁共V兲 ⫺ n

␶n共V兲

where

n⬁共V兲 ⫽

1

1 ⫹ exp关共Vn ⫺ V兲/Sn兲]

␶n共V兲 ⫽

c

exp关共V ⫺ V␶兲/a兴 ⫹ exp关共V␶ ⫺ V兲/b兴

(B1)

(B2)

(B3)

where n⬁ is the steady-state value of the general gating
variable, Vn is the half-activation potential, Sn is the slopes
at half-maximal potential, ␶n(V) is the relaxation time con-
stant, a, b, c, and V␶ are the adjustable coefﬁcients. The
coefﬁcients were ﬁtted on the basis of previous models (26,
82): Vn ⫽ ⫺14 mV, Sn ⫽ 7 mV, a ⫽ 65 mV, b ⫽ 20 mV, c ⫽
20 ms, and V␶ ⫽ ⫺75 mV.

APPENDIX C: FRACTION OF KATP CHANNELS OPEN

For the fraction of KATP channels open, we adopt a detailed
kinetic model that was created by Magnus and Keizer (58) and
that was based on the results of Ref. 43. The equation for the
fraction of open channels can be included on the basis of that
model if we take into account the parameters determining
adenine nucleotide concentrations (see Table 2 from Ref. 58).
Then the resulting fraction of KATP channels open has the form

OKATP ⫽

0.08共1 ⫹ 0.33关ADP兴i/Kdd兲

⫹ 0.89共0.165关ADP兴i/Kdd兲2
共1 ⫹ 0.165关ADP兴i /Kdd兲2 共1 ⫹ 0.135关ADP兴i/
Ktd ⫹ 0.05关ATP兴i/Ktt兲

(C1)

APPENDIX A: NA⫹/K⫹ ACTIVE TRANSPORT

The general model (12) was employed in a modiﬁed form

according to Miwa and Imai (65).

OKATP is the fraction of channels open. Kdd, Ktd, and Ktt are
the dissociation constants (Kdd ⫽ 17 ␮M, Ktd ⫽ 26 ␮M, and
Ktt ⫽ 1 ␮M). According to Hopkins et al. (43), Eqs. 19 and C1
reproduce well the experimental data.

INa,K ⫽ PNaK共F1f2f3F4F5f6 ⫺ b1B2B3B4b5B6兲/D

(A1)

where

D ⫽ f2f3F4F5f6 ⫹ b1f3F4F5f6 ⫹ b1B2F4F5f6

⫹ b1B2B3F5f6 ⫹ b1B2B3B4f6 ⫹ b1B2B3B4b5

F1 ⫽ f1[Na⫹]i

3, F4 ⫽ f4[K⫹]o

B3 ⫽ b3[Na⫹]o
⫻ (VF/2RT), b5 ⫽ b*5 exp( ⫺ VF/2RT)

3, B4 ⫽ b4[P], B6 ⫽ b6[Ksup⫹]i

2, F5 ⫽ f5[ATP]i, B2 ⫽ b2[ADP]i,
2, f5 ⫽ f*5 exp

where PNaK is a coefﬁcient for resulting current in the pres-
ence of saturating level of ATP; [P] is an inorganic phosphate
concentration; b1, b2, b3, b4, b*5, b6, f1, f2, f3, f*5, and f6 are the
rate coefﬁcients: [P] ⫽ 4,950 ␮M, f1 ⫽ 2.5 10⫺10 ␮M⫺3 ms⫺1,
f2 ⫽ 10 ms⫺1, f3 ⫽ 0.172 ms⫺1, f4 ⫽ 1.5 10⫺8 ␮M⫺2 ms⫺1, f*5
⫽ 0.002 ␮M⫺1 ms⫺1, f6 ⫽ 11.5 ms⫺1, b1 ⫽ 100 ms⫺1, b2 ⫽
0.0001 ␮M⫺1 ms⫺1, b3 ⫽ 1.72 10⫺17 ␮M⫺3 ms⫺1, b4 ⫽ 0.0002
␮M⫺1 ms⫺1, b*5 ⫽ 0.03 ms⫺1, b6 ⫽ 6 10⫺7 ␮M⫺1 ms⫺1).

Rate constants were taken as proposed in Refs. 12 and 65
(for f*5 and b*5 see curve B in Fig. 3 from Ref. 12). PNaK was
estimated to ﬁt the experimental data (Table 1).

We thank A. Kuznetsov and M. Roe for helpful discussions.
This work was partially supported by National Institute of Dia-
betes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Grants DK-44840, DK-
20595, and DK-48494, and the Blum-Kovler Foundation.

REFERENCES
1. Ainscow EK and Rutter GA. Mitochondrial priming modiﬁes
Ca2⫹ oscillations and insulin secretion in pancreatic islets. Bio-
chem J 353: 175–180, 2001.

2. Ainscow EK and Rutter GA. Glucose-stimulated oscillations
in free cytosolic ATP concentration imaged in single islet ␤-sells:
evidence for a Ca2⫹-dependent mechanism. Diabetes 51: S162–
S170, 2002.

3. Allen V, Swigart P, Cheung R, Cockcroft S, and Katan M.
Regulation of inositol lipid-speciﬁc phospholipase c␦ by changes
in Ca2⫹ ion concentrations. Biochem J 327: 545–552, 1997.

4. Ashcroft FM and Rorsman P. Electrophysiology of the pan-

creatic ␤-cell. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 54: 87–143, 1989.

5. Barker CJ, Nilsson T, Kirk CJ, Michell RH, and Berggren
PO. Simultaneous oscillations of cytoplasmic free Ca2⫹ concen-
tration and Ins(1,4,5)P3 concentration in mouse pancreatic
␤-cells. Biochem J 297: 265–268, 1994.

6. Bertram R and Sherman A. Dynamical complexity and tem-
poral plasticity in pancreatic ␤-cells. J Biosci 25: 197–209, 2000.

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

E153

Chem 267: 2115–2118, 1992.

11. Carignani C, Roncarati R, Rimini R, and Terstappen GC.
Pharmacological and molecular characterisation of SK3 chan-
nels in the TE671 human medulloblastoma cell line. Brain Res
939: 11–18, 2002.

12. Chapman JB, Johnson EA, and Kootsey JM. Electrical and
biochemical properties of an enzyme model of the sodium pump.
J Membr Biol 74: 139–153, 1983.

13. Chay TR. Electrical bursting and luminal calcium oscillation in

excitable cell models. Biol Cybern 75: 419–443, 1996.

14. Chay TR. Effects of extracellular calcium on electrical bursting
and intracellular and luminal calcium oscillations in insulin
secreting pancreatic ␤-cells. Biophys J 73: 1673–1688, 1997.

15. Content. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Centrum voor Wiskunde

en Informatica. [online] ftp://ftp.cwi.nl/pub/CONTENT

16. Dean PM. Ultrastructural morphometry of the pancreatic

7. Bertram R, Sherman A, Kinard TA, and Satin LS. The
phantom bursting model for pancreatic ␤-cells. Biophys J 79:
2880–2892, 2000.

8. Bertram R, Smolen P, Sherman A, Mears D, Atwater I,
Martin F, and Soria B. A role for calcium release-activated
current (CRAC) in cholinergic modulation of electrical activity in
pancreatic ␤-cells. Biophys J 68: 2323–2332, 1995.

9. Bokvist K, Ammala C, Berggren PO, Rorsman P, and
Wahlander K. Alpha 2-adrenoreceptor stimulation does not
inhibit L-type calcium channels in mouse pancreatic ␤-cells.
Biosci Rep 11: 147–157, 1991.

10. Carafoli E. The Ca2⫹ pump of the plasma membrane. J Biol

␤-cell. Diabetologia 9: 115–119, 1973.

17. Deeney JT, Kohler M, Kubik K, Brown G, Schultz V, Torn-
heim K, Corkey BE, and Berggren PO. Glucose-induced
metabolic oscillations parallel those of Ca2⫹ and insulin release
in clonal insulin-secreting cells. A multiwell approach to oscilla-
tory cell behavior. J Biol Chem 276: 36946–36950, 2001.

18. Deeney JT, Prentki M, and Corkey BE. Metabolic control of

␤-cell function. Semin Cell Dev Biol 11: 267–275, 2000.

19. Detimary P, Gilon P, and Henquin JC. Interplay between
cytoplasmic Ca2⫹ and the ATP/ADP ratio: a feedback control
mechanism in mouse pancreatic islets. Biochem J 333: 269–274,
1998.

20. DiPolo R and Beauge L. Ionic ligand interactions with the
intracellular loop of the sodium-calcium exchanger. Modulation
by ATP. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 80: 43–67, 2002.

21. Eberhardson M and Grapengiesser E. Glucose and tolbut-
amide trigger transients of Ca2⫹ in single pancreatic ␤-cells ex-
posed to tetraethylammonium. Cell Calcium 25: 355–360, 1999.

22. Eberhardson M, Patterson S, and Grapengiesser E. Mi-
croﬂuorometric analysis of Cl⫺ permeability and its relation to
oscillatory Ca2⫹ signalling in glucose-stimulated pancreatic
␤-cells. Cell Signal 12: 781–786, 2000.

23. Erecinska M, Bryla J, Michalik M, Meglasson MD, and
Nelson D. Energy metabolism in islets of Langerhans. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1101: 273–295, 1992.

24. Fatherazi S and Cook DL. Speciﬁcity of tetraethylammonium
and quinine for three K channels in insulin-secreting cells. J
Membr Biol 120: 105–114, 1991.

25. Gall D, Gromada J, Susa I, Rorsman P, Herchuelz A, and
Bokvist K. Signiﬁcance of Na/Ca exchange for Ca2⫹ buffering
and electrical activity in mouse pancreatic ␤-cells. Biophys J 76:
2018–2028, 1999.

26. Gall D and Susa I. Effect of Na/Ca exchange on plateau fraction
and [Ca]i in models for bursting in pancreatic ␤-cells. Biophys J
77: 45–53, 1999.

27. Gilon P, Arredouani A, Gailly P, Gromada J, and Henquin
JC. Uptake and release of Ca2⫹ by the endoplasmic reticulum
contribute to the oscillations of the cytosolic Ca2⫹ concentration
triggered by Ca2⫹ inﬂux in the electrically excitable pancreatic
␤-cell. J Biol Chem 274: 20197–20205, 1999.

28. Gilon P, Ravier MA, Jonas JC, and Henquin JC. Control
mechanisms of the oscillations of insulin secretion in vitro and in
vivo. Diabetes 51: S144–S151, 2002.

29. Gilon P, Yakel J, Gromada J, Zhu Y, Henquin JC, and
Rorsman P. G protein-dependent inhibition of L-type Ca2⫹

currents by acetylcholine in mouse pancreatic ␤-cells. J Physiol
499: 65–76, 1997.

30. Giugliano M, Bove M, and Grattarola M. Insulin release at the
molecular level: metabolic-electrophysiological modeling of the pan-
creatic ␤-cells. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 47: 611–623, 2000.

31. Goforth PB, Bertram R, Khan FA, Zhang M, Sherman A, and
Satin LS. Calcium-activated K(⫹) channels of mouse beta-cells are
controlled by both store and cytoplasmic Ca(2⫹): experimental and
theoretical studies. J Gen Physiol 20: 307–322, 2002.

32. Go¨ pel SO, Kanno T, Barg S, Eliasson L, Galvanovskis J,
Renstrom E, and Rorsman P. Activation of Ca2⫹-dependent
K⫹ channels contributes to rhythmic ﬁring of action potentials in
mouse pancreatic ␤-cells. J Gen Physiol 114: 759–770, 1999.

33. Go¨pel SO, Kanno T, Barg S, Galvanovskis J, and Rorsman P.
Voltage-gated and resting membrane currents recorded from
␤-cells in intact mouse pancreatic islets. J Physiol 521: 717–728,
1999.

34. Grapengiesser E. Glucose induces cytoplasmic Na⫹ oscilla-
tions in pancreatic beta-cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
226: 830–835, 1996.

35. Grapengiesser E. Unmasking of a periodic Na⫹ entry in glu-
cose-stimulated pancreatic ␤-cells after partial inhibition of the
Na/K pump. Endocrinology 139: 3227–3231, 1998.

36. Gromada J, Frokjaer-Jensen J, and Dissing S. Glucose
stimulates voltage- and calcium-dependent inositol trisphos-
phate production and intracellular calcium mobilization in insu-
lin-secreting in ␤TC3 cells. Biochem J 314: 339–345, 1996.

37. Gylfe E, Ahmed M, Bergsten P, Dansk H, Dyachok O,
Eberhardson M, Grapengiesser E, Hellman B, Lin JM,
Sundsten T, Tengholm A, Vieira E, and Westerlund J.
Signaling underlying pulsatile insulin secretion. Ups J Med Sci
105: 35–51, 2000.

38. Hagar RE and Ehrlich BE. Regulation of the type III InsP3
receptor and its role in ␤-cell function. Cell Mol Life Sci 57:
1938–1949, 2000.

39. Hagar RE and Ehrlich BE. Regulation of the type III InsP(3)

receptor by InsP(3) and ATP. Biophys J 79: 271–278, 2000.

40. Hao L, Rigaud JL, and Inesi G. Ca2⫹/H⫹ countertransport
and electrogenicity in proteoliposomes containing erythrocyte
plasma membrane Ca-ATPase and exogenous lipids. J Biol
Chem 269: 14268–14275, 1994.

41. Hille B. Ion Channels and Excitable Membranes (3rd ed.). Sun-

derland, MS: Sinauer Associated, 2001.

42. Hirose K, Kadowaki S, Tanabe M, Takeshima H, and Iino
M. Spatiotemporal dynamics of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate that
underlies complex Ca2⫹ mobilization patterns. Science 284:
1527–1530, 1999.

43. Hopkins WF, Fatherazi S, Peter-Riesch B, Corkey BE, and
Cook DL. Two sites for adenine-nucleotide regulation of ATP-
sensitive potassium channels in mouse pancreatic ␤-cells and
HIT cells. J Membr Biol 129: 287–295, 1992.

44. Kanno T, Rorsman P, and Go¨pel SO. Glucose-dependent regu-
lation of rhythmic action potential ﬁring in pancreatic beta-cells by
K(ATP)-channel modulation. J Physiol 545: 501–507, 2002.

45. Kanno T, Suga S, Wu J, Kimura M, and Wakui M. Intracellular
cAMP potentiates voltage-dependent activation of L-type Ca2⫹
channels in rat islet ␤-cells. Pﬂu¨gers Arch 435: 578–580, 1998.

46. Keizer J and Magnus G. ATP-sensitive potassium channel and
bursting in the pancreatic ␤-cell. A theoretical study. Biophys J
56: 229–242, 1989.

47. Kitasato H, Kai R, Ding WG, and Omatsu-Kanbe M. The
intrinsic rhythmicity of spike-burst generation in pancreatic
␤-cells and intercellular interaction within an islet. Jpn
J Physiol 46: 363–373, 1996.

48. Kinard TA, deVries D, Sherman A, and Satin LS. Modula-
tion of the bursting properties of single mouse pancreatic ␤-cells
by artiﬁcial conductances. Biophys J 76: 1423–1435, 1999.

49. Ko¨ hler M, Hirschberg B, Bond CT, Kinzie JM, Marrion
NV, Maylie J, and Adelman JP. Small-conductance, calcium-
activated potassium channels from mammalian brain. Science
273: 1709–1714, 1996.

50. Kukuljan M, Goncaves AG, and Atwater I. Charybdotoxin-
sensitive K(Ca) channel is not involved in glucose-induced electrical
activity in pancreatic ␤-cells. J Membr Biol 119: 187–195, 1991.

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

E154

MODELING ION FLUX IN PANCREATIC ␤-CELLS

51. Larsson O, Kindmark H, Bra¨ nstro¨ m R, Fredholm B, and
Berggren PO. Oscillations in KATP channel activity promote
oscillations in cytoplasmic free Ca2⫹ concentration in the pan-
creatic ␤-cell. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93: 5161–5165, 1996.

52. Leech CA and Habener JF. A role for Ca2⫹ sensitive nonse-
lective cation channels in regulating the membrane potential of
pancreatic ␤-cells. Diabetes 47: 1066–1073, 1998.

53. Leinders T and Vijverberg HPM. Ca2⫹ dependence of small
Ca2⫹-activated K⫹ channels in cultured N1E-115 mouse neuro-
blastoma cells. Pﬂu¨ gers Arch 422: 223–232, 1992.

54. Liu YJ, Tengholm A, Grapengiesser E, Hellman B, and
Gylfe E. Origin of slow and fast oscillations of Ca2⫹ in mouse
pancreatic islets. J Physiol 508: 471–481, 1998.

55. Loew LM and Schaff JC. The virtual cell: a software environ-
ment for computational cell biology. Trends Biotechnol 19: 401–
406, 2001.

56. MacDonald PE, Ha XF, Wang J, Smukler SR, Sun AM,
Gaisano HY, Salapatek AM, Backx PH, and Wheeler MB.
Members of the Kv1 and Kv2 voltage-dependent K⫹ channel
families regulate insulin secretion. Mol Endocrinol 15: 1423–
1435, 2001.

57. Maes K, Missiaen L, De Smet P, Vanlingen S, Callewaert
G, Parys JB, and De Smedt H. Differential modulation of
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 and type 3 by ATP.
Cell Calcium 7: 257–267, 2000.

58. Magnus G and Keizer J. Model of ␤-cell mitochondrial calcium
handling and electrical activity. I. Cytoplasmic variables. Am J
Physiol Cell Physiol 274: C1158–C1173, 1998.

59. Magnus G and Keizer J. Model of ␤-cell mitochondrial calcium
handling and electrical activity. II. Mitochondrial variables.
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 274: C1174–C1184, 1998.

60. Mak DO, McBride S, and Foskett JK. Regulation by Ca2⫹
and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3) of single recombinant
type 3 InsP3 receptor channels. Ca2⫹ activation uniquely distin-
guishes types 1 and 3 insp3 receptors. J Gen Physiol 117:
435–446, 2001.

61. Matschinsky FM, Landgraf R, Ellerman J, and Kotler-
Brajtburg J. Glucoreceptor mechanisms in islets of Langer-
hans. Diabetes 21, Suppl 2: 555–569, 1972.

62. Mears D, Sheppard NF Jr, Atwater I, Rojas E, Bertram R,
and Sherman A. Evidence that calcium release-activated cur-
rent mediates transient glucose-induced electrical activity in the
pancreatic ␤-cell. J Membr Biol 155: 47–55, 1997.

63. Meyer T, Wensel T, and Stryer L. Kinetics of calcium channel
opening by inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate. Biochemistry 29: 32–37,
1990.

64. Miura Y, Henquin JC, and Gilon P. Emptying of intracellular
Ca2⫹ stores stimulates Ca2⫹ entry in mouse pancreatic beta-cells
by both direct and indirect mechanisms. J Physiol 503: 387–398,
1997.

65. Miwa Y and Imai Y. Simulation of spike-burst generation and
Ca2⫹ oscillation in pancreatic ␤-cells. Jpn J Physiol 49: 353–364, 1999.
66. Moller JV, Juul B, and le Maire M. Structural organization,
ion transport, and energy transduction of P-type ATPases. Bio-
chim Biophys Acta 1286: 1–51, 1996.

67. Nygren A, Fiset C, Firek L, Clark JW, Lindblad DS, Clark
RB, and Giles WR. Mathematical model of an adult human
atrial cell: the role of K⫹ currents in repolarization. Circ Res 82:
63–81, 1998.

68. Owada S, Larsson O, Arkhammar P, Katz AI, Chibalin AV,
Berggren PO, and Bertorello AM. Glucose decreases
Na⫹,K⫹-ATPase activity in pancreatic ␤-cells. An effect medi-
ated via Ca2⫹-independent phospholipase A2 and protein kinase
C-dependent phosphorylation of the alpha-subunit. J Biol Chem
274: 2000–2008, 1999.

69. Petersen OH, Tepikin A, and Park MK. The endoplasmic
reticulum: one continuous or several separate Ca2⫹ stores?
Trends Neurosci 24: 271–276, 2001.

70. Philipson LH. ␤-Cell ion channels: keys to endodermal excit-

ability. Horm Metab Res 31: 455–461, 1999.

71. Rice JJ, Jafri MS, and Winslow RL. Modeling short-term
interval-force relations in cardiac muscle. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol 278: H913–H931, 2000.

72. Roe MW, Lancaster ME, Mertz RJ, Worley JF III, and
Dukes ID. Voltage-dependent intracellular calcium release
from mouse islets stimulated by glucose. J Biol Chem 268:
9953–9956, 1993.

73. Roe MW, Worley JF III, Mittal AA, Kuznetsov A, DasGupta
S, Mertz RJ, Witherspoon SM III, Blair N, Lancaster ME,
McIntyre MS, Shehee WR, Dukes ID, and Philipson LH.
Expression and function of pancreatic ␤-cell delayed rectiﬁer K⫹
channels. Role in stimulus-secretion coupling. J Biol Chem 271:
32241–32246, 1996.

74. Roe MW, Worley JF III, Qian F, Tamarina N, Mittal AA,
Dralyuk F, Blair NT, Mertz RJ, Philipson LH, and Dukes
ID. Characterization of a Ca2⫹ release-activated nonselective
cation current regulating membrane potential and [Ca2⫹]i oscil-
lations in transgenically derived ␤-cells. J Biol Chem 273:
10402–10410, 1998.

75. Rosario LM, Barbosa RM, Antunes CM, Silva AM, Abrun-
hosa AJ, and Santos RM. Bursting electrical activity in pan-
creatic ␤-cells: evidence that the channel underlying the burst is
sensitive to Ca2⫹ inﬂux through L-type Ca2⫹ channels. Pﬂu¨ gers
Arch 424: 439–447, 1993.

76. Rorsman P. The pancreatic ␤-cell as a fuel sensor: an electro-

physiologist’s viewpoint. Diabetologia 40: 487–495, 1997.

77. Rorsman P, Ammala C, Berggren PO, Bokvist K, and Lars-
son O. Cytoplasmic calcium transients due to single action
potentials and voltage-clamp depolarizations in mouse pancre-
atic ␤-cells. EMBO J 11: 2877–2884, 1992.

78. Sherman A. Contributions of modeling to understanding stim-
ulus-secretion coupling in pancreatic ␤-cells. Am J Physiol En-
docrinol Metab 271: E362–E372, 1996.

79. Sims CE and Allbritton NL. Metabolism of inositol 1,4,5-
trisphosphate and inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate by the oo-
cytes of Xenopus laevis. J Biol Chem 273: 4052–4058, 1998.

80. Smith PA, Aschroft FM, and Fewtrell CM. Permeation and
gating properties of the L-type calcium channel in mouse pan-
creatic ␤-cells. J Gen Physiol 101: 767–797, 1993.

81. Smith PA, Ashcroft FM, and Rorsman P. Simultaneous
recordings of glucose dependent electrical activity and ATP-
regulated K⫹-currents in isolated mouse pancreatic ␤-cells.
FEBS Lett 261: 187–190, 1990.

82. Smolen P and Keizer J. Slow voltage inactivation of Ca2⫹
currents and bursting mechanisms for the mouse pancreatic
␤-cell. J Membr Biol 127: 9–19, 1992.

83. Soria B and Martin F. Cytosolic calcium oscillations and insu-
lin release in pancreatic islets of Langerhans. Diabetes Metab 24:
37–40, 1998.

84. Straub SG, Kornreich B, Oswald RE, Nemeth EF, and
Sharp GW. The calcimimetic R-467 potentiates insulin secre-
tion in pancreatic ␤-cells by activation of a nonspeciﬁc cation
channel. J Biol Chem 275: 18777–18784, 2000.

85. Sturis J, Pugh WL, Tang J, Ostrega DM, Polonsky JS, and
Polonsky KS. Alterations in pulsatile insulin secretion in the
Zucker diabetic fatty rat. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 267:
E250–E259, 1994.

86. Tengholm A, Hellman B, and Gylfe E. The endoplasmic
reticulum is a glucose-modulated high-afﬁnity sink for Ca2⫹ in
mouse pancreatic ␤-cells. J Physiol 530: 533–540, 2001.

87. Varadi A, Molnar E, and Ashcroft SJ. Characterisation of
endoplasmic reticulum and plasma membrane Ca2⫹-ATPases in
pancreatic ␤-cells and in islets of Langerhans. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1236: 119–127, 1995.

88. Worley JK III, McIntyre MS, Spencer B, and Dukes ID.
Depletion of intracellular Ca2⫹ stores activates a maitotoxin-
sensitive nonselective cationic current in ␤-cells. J Biol Chem
269: 32055–32058, 1994.

89. Worley JF III, McIntyre MS, Spencer B, Mertz RJ, Roe
MW, and Dukes ID. Endoplasmic reticulum calcium store reg-
ulates membrane potential in mouse islet ␤-cells. J Biol Chem
269: 14359–14362, 1994.

AJP-Endocrinol Metab • VOL 285 • JULY 2003 • www.ajpendo.org

